everybody has narcissistic Tendencies
and we're all self-absorbed but nobody
wants to admit it it's always somebody
else it's always Donald Trump it's
always Elon Musk but everyone has a
manipulative side there are no Saints in
this world but can you use it
productively yes most definitely there's
deep narcissists who are very
problematic and there's healthy
narcissists and knowing the distinction
between the two will help save you years
of misery what if from dealing with a
narcissist I want you to do the
following I want you to Robert Green is
one of the most influential writers in
history unraveling the secrets of power
strategy and human psychology that are
essential for purpose resilience and
success what is it about human nature
that we just don't want to admit one is
that Envy is deeply ingrained in all of
us in fact always wanting to be better
and Superior to others it's the most
motivating factor of 90% of human
behavior but if you don't admit it to
yourself that ugly emotion is like a
nuclear bomb to all aspects of life it
will seize you by the throat and make
you miserable but there's also
understanding things like we all judge
on appearances that everyone has a dark
side and that we are all actors and I
will get into the nitty-gritty of all of
them because it's really about how
powerful people use those traits for
their success people are lonelier than
ever and when you look at the impact
that that's having it's equal to smoking
15 cigarettes a day what is the antidote
for this I empathize with it very much
so because when I was younger I was
losing in The Game of Life I was very
depressed and even suicidal but what
Lifted Me Out was
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show so could I ask you for a favor
before we start if you like the show and
you like what we do here and you want to
support us the free simple way that you
can do just that is by hitting the
Subscribe button and my commitment to
you is if you do that then I'll do
everything in my power me and my team to
make sure that this show is better for
you every single week we'll listen to
your feedback we'll find the guest that
you want me to speak to and we'll
continue to do what we do thank you so
much
[Music]
Robert at this moment in
time what do you believe your followers
your fans the people that love your
books what do you believe that they're
struggling with the most and I'm asking
this question because I imagine you get
thousands of DMS and messages from these
people what are the common themes well
the the most common question I get
particularly from people in their
20s is they don't really know uh where
they're headed they don't know what
their career is what I call in Mastery
their life's task and I talk a lot about
it in interviews and in my in the book
Mastery and I make it the point that it
is the most important decision in your
life figuring out what you were destined
for why you were born what you were
created for what makes you
unique and I say that everything from
that realization from that understanding
kind of stems from that your sense of
fulfillment your happiness everything
will come from that one
realization and a lot of young people
are very confused right now and I don't
blame them these are very very confusing
times that they're going through much
more confusing than anything I had to
deal with particularly I think the
influence of technology and social media
and what I mean by that is to know who
you are to know what you were meant to
do in life what what why you were born
what makes you unique requires a lot of
reflection on yourself self aware Wess
self- knowledge you have to go Inward
and when your attention is always
focused so much on what other people are
doing what other people are saying you
know the what they think is hot what
they think is cool you become kind of a
stranger to yourself right so when I
talk about that concept to them it's
like it sounds interesting Robert but I
have no idea what that is I don't know
what my my life's task is now that's
maybe 30 or 40% of the emails that I get
it's quite high but it's not all of them
but it is a trend I've noticed with
young people who are going through I
think very very confusing times and uh
I'm very empathetic to it because I was
actually someone who was quite lost in
my 20s and I know the pain that that can
cause not feeling like your life has any
meaning you know I think that's
something that really is is um
tormenting a lot of young people what
does life mean what will give me a sense
of meaning right to what I'm doing to
where I'm headed to my daily experiences
and not having that is deeply disturbing
and I've been through that myself I
think I'm getting a lot of that kind of
feedback and a lot of those emails among
others and is there a strategy that
young people or really anybody that
feels lost or aimless in their
life should and is able to deploy to
find their purpose to find the direction
the the thing they should be aiming
at well you know you have to get out of
this this this way of thinking that that
so many people have which everything has
to be simple and linear and I'm heading
this direction it's got to be a solution
like I'm hacking my way to the truth
life doesn't work that way life is very
complex so I can't give you a single
track answer to finding your life
purpose you as an individual but I can
give you kind of Clues I can kind of
direct you toward certain paths that
have worked for me and that have worked
for hundreds of thousands of other
people who've become Masters or very
successful in their field and the first
thing is you have to go inward so you
have to resist the pull that our culture
gives you you have to also really want
this that's probably what it really
comes down to are you unhappy are you
frustrated are you hitting kind of rock
bottom is this a turning point in your
life where you realize if I keep going
this way in 5 years it's going to be
really serious okay it has to be
important to you and you have to to have
a sense of
urgency and with that sense of urgency
you have to make some decisions and one
of the decisions that's absolutely
essential is to pay less attention to
what other people are doing to pay less
attention to what other people are
saying to pay less attention to what
people are telling you you should be
doing and to go Inward and think about
yourself and think about what you love
and what your interests are that have
nothing to do with what people are doing
on social media the things that grab you
that excite you deeply inside in a way
that's almost
irresistible now for me I can say that
it was always been writing okay and I
just couldn't figure out what kind of
writing but there's also things like
when I ever read anything that has to do
with ancient history particularly the
origins of of humanity hundreds of you
know tens of thousands of years ago I am
so excited I can't I can't I can read
every single article about that every
discovery that takes place in Africa
about our Origins it just puts my mind
in a spin to think that this is who we
were 100,000 years going this is who we
are now I want to know more that's like
this one of these things that hits you
in the gut well the people out there you
have that there's something like that
you had it when you were a child you had
it when you were two three four years
old five years old and you've lost it
because you're listening too much to
other people so it's kind of like
archaeology would be the metaphor you
have to dig and dig and dig and find
those bones and those relics and those
artifacts from your past the things that
really excite you as well as the things
that you hate now if I were to go you
know kind of do a reverse engineering
which I do with a lot of people who were
successful like yourself I could go back
and kind of find that with you where
that hit you because you had a
particular path that led you to doing
these podcasts I know it wasn't a
straight line you deviated you were in
some other job that you ated and then
you slowly found your
way each of those stories there's a
lesson for people right and that's what
I compiled in Mastery but it all begins
from a sense of urgency I can't go on
this way I have to find something that I
love when you're 20 or 21 maybe you
don't feel that urgency because you're
so young you know you look good you have
lots of energy the world's kind of open
to you but you have to be careful
because time passes really quickly those
years in your 20s they go by faster than
you think and if you're turned 30 and
you never thought about this and you're
kind of been wandering around trying
things it starts to get a little
difficult much harder for you so it's
better if you have that sense of urgency
when you're 21 or
22 and the other thing I would say is
you don't learn anything if you're not
excited by it so you have to have a
sense of fun and Adventure about this so
discovering what your life's task can't
be this dreary boring thing that Roberts
advoca you do where you oh I have to
spend time with myself I have to look
you know do a journal blah blah blah no
it's fun it's an adventure trying
different things that fit into this
General shape of what you were destined
for it's a blast you know when I was in
my 20s I had more fun than anybody I had
an amazing time it was the best years of
my life I was trying all sorts of
different things I was exploring I was
traveling had Adventures so I don't want
your life to be boring I want you to
learn I want you to have Adventures but
you have to have a sense of direction a
sense of purpose to guide that kind of
those those different Adventures that
you go on do you think it's harder to
find your sense of purpose and what
you're deeply connected to as you get
older yeah I I think so your your mind
gets a little bit more rigid you think
you know all of the ansers right but
what happens with a lot of people I also
get corresponden from or let's say
turning 40 or even a little bit older
and they're coming to those Crossroads
is it's even much more painful than when
you're in your 20s because there's a
sense of regret there's a sense that
you've wasted your time and to get back
to a path that will suit you can be very
difficult as you mentioned but there's
also another another side to that which
is you probably have been learning some
skills in your life you probably have
had some experiences that have changed
you because when you're 21 22 you don't
know the world you don't know people you
think you know everything but you don't
know anything right you've never had any
experiences in life you never had to
suffer maybe you have but not really
suffering like you do when you get older
okay so you're 40 you've had tough
experiences you've been hardened you got
you know you're not so fragile and
you've learned things if you change your
mindset at that age and you go I'm going
to take what I have my experiences my
skills what I've learned and I'm going
to redirect it towards something more
exciting for me then it will work for
you right but as you say it can be
harder because you're more set in your
ways and you've built a life you've
built a network you've built a
reputation for being this thing whether
it's lawyer doctor dentist whatever it
might be and so there's a element of
shedding that might have to occur
shedding people shedding a city that you
live in shedding a a way that people
know you an income
and that's deeply difficult and I think
some people would prefer the certain
misery of their current situation to the
uncertainty and the shedding that occurs
when they go in search of something
else yeah but I mean the pain that you
feel when you get older and you know we
have we humans have very active Minds
we're gifted with the most powerful
organ in the entire universe the human
brain the billions of possible
Connections in our brain is greater than
anything in the entire universe it is
the most amazing instrument and our
brains are very active and when you get
older and you don't have anything to put
your brain onto and things are slowing
down you don't realize that that's
what's making you depressed you don't
realize that the fact that you haven't
been able to fulfill what you were meant
to fulfill is actually the source of
your misery and unhappiness you will
blame it on other people you will blame
it on the world you will blame it on
politics you won't look at yourself and
realize that it comes from you and the
sadness comes from you and the fact that
you're not maximizing you're not
exploiting this gift that you were given
so it might be difficult to shed all of
that but I've talked to people I'd say
more like around 30 years old who say
Robert I'm at this horrible job you know
I'm I'm in a fast food place or
something I don't remember what it was
or I'm a barista whatever you know I'm
so unhappy I have a wife and I have two
kids what do I do right and so I and and
I I go into their misery a little bit
and then I say okay let's let's first
figure out something that you think
would you would really want in life
something that will have an income
because you have to pay for your wife
and your children you can't just go off
and write poetry or become a rockstar
you have to support yourself and your
family what could that possibly be and
we dig and we dig and we dig I say all
right we have an an answer kind of an
idea I want you to do the following I
want you to carve out two hours or as
much as you can at night where you start
exploring this field on the internet and
you start considering maybe going to
night school okay and taking classes
that change this course and then I want
you to think of five years where you're
going to be a goal five years ahead and
they tell me overnight just having that
has changed them suddenly from their
depression they have hope and they feel
a million times better and they have
energy just from realizing that there is
a possibility it's going to take hard
work but there is an answer there is a
place to go and so it changes it when
you when you have a some sense of
direction there'll be so many people
listening to that now and they'll be
thinking I have a plan I have an idea or
at least a kernel of an idea but I've
spent the last 3 months 6 months 12
months 18 months two years thinking
thinking thinking thinking and not doing
and not doing yeah people stop me all
the time and they'll say Steve I'm
thinking of starting a podcast and I'll
say like how long have you been thinking
about this but for the last two and a
half years yeah you know I talk in
Mastery about something a concept called
learning by doing and um back in in the
Middle Ages they used to have an
apprenticeship that you would go through
seven years you would learn to be a
Craftsman right you'd first go from
being an apprentice to a journeyman to a
Master by doing things the brain learns
but if you never do anything you're
never going to learn so if you suddenly
said I've been thinking about a podcast
I would say get off your ass and start
the podcast
tomorrow and it fails you have learned
so many things you've learned more in
those three months of failure than you
have been two years thinking or five
years of getting a MBA from from some
school and putting yourself massive debt
learn by doing learn by failing why is
planning and procrastination that comes
with the prolonged planning so tempting
for people like why do we love to plan
plan plan plan plan because you're
afraid of failure quite honestly um I
mean Freud has a word for in German air
folks anst which means fear of success
um because this is something that
afflicts a lot of
adolescents because if you're successful
you now have responsibility you now have
a reputation you now have succeeded and
your next venture could fail right
there's pressure that comes with trying
something and putting your name out
there and if I don't ever try anything
if I don't bother if I blame the world I
blame my parents I blame my education
system I blame my partner this that and
the together then you never have to
worry you never have to have that
responsibility you never have to have
that fear of success and that holds
people back so it's easier to not do
anything and stay in your little bubble
and go God if I only if only I had had
money I would have written this great
novel I would you know done this this or
that the other it's just crap you're
trying to delude yourself and you're
afraid of actually putting your neck out
on the line that's what it comes down to
it's a common syndrome among adolescents
I was reading I think it was the book
the courage to be disliked and it was
talking in one of the sections about how
some people would like they prefer to
live in the like Realm of possibility
and the realm of possibility is the
space you live when you declare to the
world that you're going to do something
and be something and be and before you
actually do it so when I tell my friends
listen I'm going to become an actor for
example the year and a half where I go
around saying that I live in the world
of possibility where there's been no
feedback to disprove me yeah yeah which
is nice yeah but I'm kind of getting the
credit for being the type of person
that's aspiring to change yeah and that
like Realm of possibility before you get
feedback or try yeah is a very nice
place to be for some it is and it it's
very addicting and it's kind of a
narcotic but the thing is so you've got
this realm of possibility which you
could become anything I could become an
actor I could become a great novelist I
could become a CEO I could be Elon Musk
II but the way the world works is you
don't achieve anything unless you have
limits having limits and hitting that
wall and that resistance is what makes
you learn is what makes you great is how
the human brain functions and what I
mean by that is let's say you you're
learning the
piano you can't just start out playing
anything and just doing all the notes
it's very limited what you can do right
and you have to you have to go within
those limits and those walls and learn
the first things first and then those
walls start to expand a little bit but
you're constantly pressing against
limits and and those limits make you
stronger and stronger it's like when
you're swimming the resistance in the
water is what makes your muscles bigger
right the resistance of limits is what
makes your brain bigger makes you more
successful makes you learn but if all
you do is live in that nebulous world of
possibility you're never developing
you're never getting any muscle you're
never getting any strength you're not
developing life skills it's a tough
World Stephen you know that
people can be very cruel it can be very
a mean-spirited world you have to have a
thick skin in this world you have to
develop some toughness and you develop
that toughness by trying things out and
by failing and if you fail you know like
um my wife's in the film business and we
know a lot of actors an actor you know
you think it's all glamorous but it's
actually like 99% rejection people are
constantly rejecting you and they're
rejecting you for things that are you
have no control over like your looks you
know and so what separates the actors
who succeed and the ones who don't are
those that have a bit of a t tough skin
they don't take that rejection oh I'm so
I'm So Unworthy I hate myself oh the
world's so awful they go all right I'm
going to go on to the next one I learned
what wasn't working there and you
develop some toughness if you don't
develop that toughness you're never
going to get anywhere in life and you
get it by trying and trying and working
at it and when you in that sort of first
chapter of your professional life is
there anything from all of the work that
you've done the writing that you've done
that a young person should be trying to
acquire and I say that should they be
aiming at knowledge skills reputation
money um Network definitely not money
definitely not reputation perhaps I mean
um yeah rep or fame um perhaps Network
can't help but what you really want to
do in this world in the 21st C
in our decade is skills you want to be
learning skills the more skills you have
and I mean true skills I don't mean
trying something out for a year and then
going on to something else for another I
mean getting real skill at something
right whether it's in computers whether
it's in the Arts in any field real skill
and then if you can develop two or three
skills by the time you're in your 20s
and still have some fun the world is
going to open up to you because what
you're going to be able ble to do when
you turn 30 is you're going to go I can
take that skill that I learned in
computers I can take that skill skill I
learned in media and in in creating a
podcast or whatever and I can create a
business that's going to combine the two
in a way that no one has ever thought of
because I'm a unique person the world
will open up to you skills are the gold
of the 21st century and if you're
seduced by money if you think about
money you're doomed because that's not
what matters in life because let's say
you have two job offers one is at
Goldman
Sachs opening position for 150,000 a
year and one is at some startup for
30,000 a year and you're living in New
York and you're going to be starving
you're going to be sharing a miserable
little flat somewhere in Bushwick
whatever okay take the $30,000 a year
job because you're going to learn so
much you're going to be handson whereas
in that other job you're going to be
lost in in their you're going to be
among hundreds of other young people and
you're not going to have
responsibilities here you're going to
have responsibilities so money is not
what matters to you because when you're
in your 20s you can starve you can live
on less food you can have it a little
tough because you're young I I know
myself I I lived I was very poor I lived
in
London had a job in London in 1984 I
believe yeah ' 84 and I was
making I think it was was3 a week maybe
it's less than that was by starting
salary and my girlfriend at the time the
only thing we could eat was turnips and
cauliflower cauliflower cheese was our
main dish but I was 25 I could handle it
so you can handle not making money and
learning because that's what's most
important I don't think many young
people in that first season of Life
realize how long life is so you know we
we try and take shortcuts we try and get
to the money as fast as we can but
you're telling me to take a longer road
which is the acquisition of skills even
at the cost of some of those short-term
rewards that are very tempting to post
on my Instagram yeah well I mean um also
you know you look at somebody like Steve
Jobs I can relate to that cuz he wasn't
interested in money at all it was never
the motivating factor it's never been my
motivating factor right I wanted to have
fun and I wanted to be successful and I
wanted to be able to write he wanted to
design the most beautiful pieces of
technology in the world it ended up he
was like the richest man of the world at
the time but he never cared about money
it wasn't what motivated him I never
cared about money and now I'm not as
rich as Steve Jobs but I'm doing fairly
well because it'll come to you if you
play the game right if you learn the
skills when you're young and then you
develop your own business by the time
you're 35 you'll be making four times
what you would have made at that Goldman
Sachs job right M that's that's the
that's how the game is played these days
starting your own business being an
entrepreneur being an entrepreneur is
the most powerful position you can
attain for aim for some people aren't
aren't you know destined for that that's
not in their DNA but to me that's what
what we should all be aiming for To Be
Your Own Boss because personally I hated
working for other people but being an
entrepreneur starting your own business
one that has a niche in this world
you're going to make all the money that
you'll ever need it's quite painful
being an entrepreneur though I think it
was actually Elon that said building his
businesses is like chewing glass and
staring into the abyss and I can relate
to some degree of the businesses that
I've built over the years and just the
immense hardship and uncertainty and you
know I guess there's at times a subtle
Envy for your team members who are
unaware of the chaos that one has to
endure to make sure everybody's paid on
time and you know make sure everything's
everyone's happy okay but um the lesson
for me in all of that is altering your
sense of what pleasure and happiness is
so in the moment it's painful right and
we don't like pain nobody likes pain I
don't like pain right but if your sense
of what pleasure is and happiness is
only like here from the present moment
to here it's going to be very hard to
get out of that but if you're your sense
of pleasure and happiness is here long
time yeah then then you've got you've
got power you've got maneuverability you
have room to maneuver and that's that's
the key to the whole thing so ah okay so
you're saying that if I have a
short-term view on happiness I I expect
it today now and every day yeah then my
life's not going to be great but if I
expect happiness to be a longterm yeah
so I mean look at you now is what I'm
trying to say you're pretty happy I
imagine yeah you're pretty fulfilled
right and you wouldn't have gotten there
if when you were 24 or whatever you just
gave up because it was so painful I
better just go grab that that easy job
working for a bank or something you'd be
miserable now whereas look at you now
that's what I'm trying to open people's
minds to follow Steven Bartlett here
that's that's the model one of the uh
things that I think helped me get here
is my dark side you talk about dark
sides a lot and when I say my dark side
I mean the the insecurity the shame the
um
the the wanting to fit in all of those
kinds of things that acted as a driving
force and a lot of people have a do and
I've heard you talk about how all great
Achievers have a bit of a dark side in
them um H how do
we how do we Channel our dark side so
that it's productive and not destructive
I was talking to someone the other day
who is a very successful entrepreneur
and they have their own story of like
shame and embarrassment and TR trying to
run away from a certain life they used
to have
and that made them successful but now
they work 18 hours a day they're just
like almost addicted to their work so I
wonder if it can go too far I see yeah
but they say they're happy they do yeah
they say they're really happy do you
believe
it it's hard to
distinguish true happiness
from the contentment that you get when
you
are successful escaping your dark side
do you know do you know what I mean by
that because this
individual has
successfully ran away from their
darkness and they appear to be in a a
state of contentment yeah because
they're s succeeding in their pursuit of
running away from their past but I don't
know if that's
happiness some Yogi might tell me that
Happiness is when you stop
running well um you know I I I worked
for somebody I was on the board of
directors for this company American
Apparel which no longer exists and the
CEO Dove Charney was the founder of the
company an incredible entrepreneur who
from one little shop here in Los Angeles
when I met him created this
Empire and it was incredibly rewarding
and he was a I'd say a very fulfilled
person but he couldn't stop he couldn't
stop it was like a demon possessed him
he had to have more he had to have he
had to build more buildings he had to
have more American apparels all over the
world he leveraged himself and then when
the crash occurred in 2007 just before
the company just after the company went
public he was so in debt that it the
company never recovered right he tried
too hard he didn't know the limits okay
so part of this isn't when I said If
Money motivates you then you're going to
have that demon if Fame and reputation
motivates you and that demon is going to
take seize you by the throat and going
to make you work 18 hours until
Everybody Eats your dust and you
humiliate all your enemies and you're
miserable right so knowing who you are
and knowing what matters is going to
save you from that kind of demonic
possession because you're actually not
going to be very successful if you're
like that you're going to burn yourself
out you're not going to have very good
ideas what happens to a lot of people
when they become successful is first of
all it goes to their head they think
they have the mest touch they think
they've got you know the Golden Touch
and then their minds start going in this
kind of uni this singular Direction they
learned how to do something and they're
just doing it doing it doing it doing it
and doing it and they don't know how to
learn they don't know that there's other
ways of doing things right and that's
what happens when you become completely
possessed and your mind isn't open and
isn't free and isn't expanding and
you're not creative anymore to be
creative will require you to try
something different to not expand your
company endlessly like he did and
instead to take the five branches that
you have here in Los Angeles and make
the product better and be more creative
with it and they'll be possessed by
money and fame and reputation that's the
answer I think there does that make
sense yeah it does yeah yeah something
that I think many many a person struggle
with which is in part this idea of
focusing on the thing in front of you
versus getting too distracted with other
opportunities and I wanted to talk to
you about this idea of focus sure and
how important you think it is for
Mastery yeah I mean so many young people
who will say to me oh I'm doing this
little crypto thing here and I've got
this hair business here and I've got
this other thing here what would you say
to those people that are trying to
become a master in this world as it
relates to
focus it's funny because I'm I'm I'm
helping a a the son of an friend of mine
who's who's who's got that problem and
he's incredibly successful I hope he's
not listening to this he's 20 years old
he's very wealthy he's done amazing
things but he's one of those people who
spread himself out to all these
different things he and I can't find a
through line what connects them all
except making money and having
connections and
stuff and it's very alluring in this
world particularly you know where
there's so many possibilities where you
can get on the internet you can learn
this out of the other people people are
doing these things you can get into
crypto you know you can you know start
your own business here you can get into
into the health and fitness world you
can and then later on try to figure out
how to connect them all but it life
doesn't work like that that's not how
the brain functions that's not what we
were meant for because it doesn't start
from you the whole thing has to start
from you it can't start from the world
it can't start from what other people
are doing it can't start from what's
sexy it has to come from within if it
doesn't come from within in then you're
going to be floundering for years and
years and years and so what I've done
with this young person whose name I
won't mention but I love dearly is what
is it that really is in your heart what
is it that you really really love how
can we connect this crypto with this
media business that you're starting with
the sports world that you're starting
with this Fitness thing what what
connects them all you know and to
me I I would was thinking I was getting
the sense we haven't solved it yet but
he's kind of
excited by celebrities and by that world
and that's fine I think there that's
there's nothing wrong with that so I'm
say well maybe what connects all this is
the film
business right because the film is is
pretty wide ranging to be a producer to
raise money you're dealing with all
kinds of different people you're
networking you're meeting starlets you
know it's a glamorous life but it's
focused okay okay so you know when you
focus on
something the world just kind of opens
up but you have to be focusing on the
right thing so if you were meant to be a
writer and then you decide because you
want money to go into law school and
then you focus very deeply on law school
what will happen is for a year or two
you'll be able to to Skid by but then
you'll the wheels will start going
slower and slower because you're not
interested in it you're not connected to
it you get bored and your focus will
start falling to pieces but if it's
something you love you can focus on that
for 7 8 10 12 years and never get bored
from observing a certain family member
of mine do a very similar thing part of
it as well is that when she would start
one Pursuit starting X
business it would get hard as it always
does and when you look over at the
person across the road they seem to be
having a much easier life with their
thing or with their crypto or with their
whatever and they tell you the story of
how much money they've made and how easy
it was whatever so you get tempted into
believing that the grass is greener you
pursue that so now you're doing two
things now your first thing starts to
suffer yeah and I think especially in
the early season of life when you don't
have Elon Musk resources much of the
game is focusing enough on one thing to
build those resources so that you have
the chance of being able to do it more
than one thing or spreading your bets a
bit more but in that first season when
you're in resource accumulation phase I
think my early investors in my company I
remember one day emailing my first
investor who's a very successful man and
saying I've got an idea and it was an
idea other than the one he' invested in
and I remember the email he I was 18
years old and he hit me so hard on that
email he was like if you don't focus on
one thing you will never ever you were
the one that was interested in this
other I was trying to the one yeah so my
investor was a very successful man and I
emailed him this other idea which I
thought was amazing yeah yeah yeah and
he sent me this email back which was
like being hit by a whip and he was like
if you don't focus on one thing now you
will never be successful cuz also you
rob yourself as you said of the chance
of accumulating deep skills yeah yes it
is um yeah I remember uh this is
something that wise people know and if
you're young if you have like a mentor
like you did who could tell you the the
truth the ropes as they are it will help
save you years of misery I remember when
we were at American Apparel it was the
Year 2007 the coming was just about to
go public I was about to be put on the
board of directors and this man came to
me who was like your investor and he
said Robert just make sure that doves
doesn't mindlessly expand make the brand
focused have it focused on one thing and
then he will be successful at the time I
thought that was interesting but I
didn't really have the guts to like
explain that to Dove but there are
people out there who understand the
truth of this but the other thing about
Envy like you say you see your other
friend doing crypto and they're having
so much fun and making so much money
tell you it's [__] they're not
having as much fun as you think right
people create a front on Instagram or or
Tik Tok or wherever where life seems so
glorious but they're never having as
much fun as you might imagine you know
in in my book laws of human nature I
talk about Aristotle Onasis who in the
60s was the wealthiest man in the world
he was married to John F Kennedy's Widow
Jacqueline Kennedy Jacqueline
Onasis who could who could be happier
than that he had Yachts Etc he was the
most unhappiest miserable person in the
world as Jacqueline Kennedy explained in
in her autobiography he was such a
mean-spirited unhappy person yet
everybody thought envied him because he
had this beautiful wife and all that
money the people you envy are not doing
nearly as well as you think so don't let
that influence your decisions in life I
am I've never forgotten a certain Johnny
IV clip that I watched many many years
ago I think it was must have been five
years ago now where he talks about
working with Steve Jobs and this is what
he says in the clip and I've never
forgotten it never forgotten
it this sounds really simplistic but it
still shocks me how few people actually
practice this um and it's a struggle to
practice but is is this issue of focus
um Steve was the most remarkably focused
person I've ever met in my
life and um and the thing with focus is
it's not sort of like this thing you
aspire to or you you decide on Monday
you know what I'm going to be
focused it is a every minute a why are
we talking about this this is what we're
working on you can achieve so much when
you truly focus and one of the things
that Steve would say um because I think
he was concerned that I wasn't um he
would say um how many things have you
said no to and I would honestly I would
have these sacrificial things CU I I
mean wanted to be very honest about it
and so I say oh I said no to this and no
to that and um he but he he knew that I
wasn't vaguely interested in doing those
things anyway um so there was no real
sacrifice what what Focus means is
saying no to something that you with
every bone in your body you think is a
phenomenal
idea and you wake up thinking about it
but you say no to it because you're
focusing on something else yeah amen
that's you know that's the Church of
focus I agree with completely I
mean I hate using my own examples CU I'm
I'm a raw avice you know I'm a rare bird
but um you know I I have this book that
I'm writing okay and it's on a very
specific
subject and I get distractions all the
time people want you know I can do this
speaking engagement in India where I've
never been before or Egypt you know kind
of thing or get involved in this
television
project and I'm actually never really
seduced by it because I just love
writing but where it really comes down
to is I'm writing this book and I and
I'm it's been going really not well it's
because I'm not focused on the actual
thing I'm trying to say so you can bring
that level of focus down to the finest
finest point of your business or your
writing or whatever what is it you're
trying to say what is it you're trying
to accomplish what is your brand really
about get into the nitty-gritty get into
the little fine grains of sand and know
what that is so every time I'm writing
my
chapter and I start writing about
something that's not directly relevant
to what it's about and what the reader
is going to be interested in I'm making
a mistake and I make the mistake for
several weeks and then I realize it and
I pull back so that level of focus has
to have a lot of energy behind it
because you're so in love with what
you're doing that when you deviate from
it this little radar inside of your
brain goes
you're you're off you're off you got to
get back to it right and it's painful
but when you do get back to it and when
do things do click it's incredibly
pleasurable so the focus for young
people that seems so painful God damn it
everyone else is having so much fun and
I'm having to learn this just keep
telling yourself that you're doing
something that your brain is going to
reward you with several years down the
line so that friend of yours that seems
to be having so much fun
in 3 years they're going to be sliding
down the ladder working at some crap job
whereas you're going to be rising up so
just keep your mind on the on the on the
larger issue there and know that working
with what your brain is works well with
will pay incredible rewards down the
line this when they talk about
compounding returns in life they always
say that it's slow than it's fast and
even this podcast if you look at the
graph of this podcast for the first
three years of me recording in my
cupboard on Sunday nights alone
completely flat no one's listening and
then by year maybe I'd say year four or
year five it goes straight up yeah and
that's a consequence of those first
three years were acquiring skills
understanding what people liked and why
they like listening to the show and
actually getting better as a talker a
speaker an interviewer Etc and what most
people Miss is they miss that internship
of the slow lonely unrewarding couple of
years because they lose focus no one's
clapping no down downloads um I've never
seen another route I've never seen
another path there I've never seen the
overnight success well I mean I I I know
I can name five other podcasters who
have the same story as you who've told
me that Lewis house Chris Williamson Jay
Shetty they all have the same story for
several years nothing crickets and I
knew these people when they were just
starting out and and then that happens I
remember when I was working with 50 Cent
on the book the 50th
law you know
people look at at rap stars and they go
wow the Glamour the the fun the
excitement the sexiness the lifestyle
but he said you know I knew him because
I was with him nobody I worked harder
than 50 he was incredibly disciplined
and Incredibly focused and when he made
it in in the music business it took
incredible years of difficulty hardship
and failure but nobody ever sees that
they only see him in concert and and all
the glamour and all the fun they never
focus on the years of grit and near
failure he got shot he nearly died his
record label dropped him he had to work
his way back up into the music industry
from the very bottom until Eminem
finally noticed him um but we don't see
that in these celebrities all the grit
and the hard work that took them to get
there we just see the success and we get
seduced by the success I've heard you
referen before Howard Gardner's frames
of of Mind theory of multiple
intelligences book and in that book it
says that there are five types of
intelligences logical intelligence
linguistical intelligence interpersonal
intelligence spatial intelligence and
bodily intelligence and it defines them
quite differently logical is the ability
to reason and solve problems and think
in abstract terms like scientists and
mathematicians linguistical intelligence
is things like writers lawyers and Poets
you're one of those writers
interpersonal intelligence are leaders
psychologists and teachers spatial
intell are Architects artists and pilots
and lastly bodal intelligence is
athletes dancers and surgeons how
important is it to know your form of
intelligence to be successful in life so
figuring out what that is is incredibly
important and the reason why I like this
book so much is we tend to think of
intelligence as intellectual as you know
computer programming or mathematics or
whatever it is you know having a a PhD
in this field and but that's not
intelligence intelligence is also bodily
intelligence like somebody like Kobe
Bryant in basketball is is as
intelligent as Albert Einstein but in a
different way so you have a parent who's
always geared towards you know going to
the best school and and being an
intellectual Giant and their child wants
to do ballet or sports or something and
you kind kind of look down on that and
you say no no no you're setting your
child up for misery recognize what one
of these frames are for your child and
press on it and let them go in that
direction because it's what they're
naturally gearing towards it's what's
fun right so if for me it was linguistic
intelligence words I've just since I was
a child I just words bewitch me I can't
believe that we have words to name
things and that they're these symbols
with letters that have sounds but a
lemon isn't a lemon it's just a word and
I was like 5 years old what the hell can
that be that's so interesting you know
that you could take a word apart and
spell other words with it so I knew from
very early on that it was words words
words words and I absolutely stink at
one of these intelligence is is build is
mechanical intelligence knowing how to
build things I'm terrible at that which
is very odd because my father was
brilliant at that and he wasn't good at
any of the others and I didn't inherit
it so that goes all you know that kind
of debunks genetics right there but you
know so figuring out which one of those
and and leaning in it and making that
the direction of your life is so so
important so if your your thing is
interpersonal intelligence and you
understand that and yet you're not
heading into a job in which you're
social and around people you're going to
be so miserable but if you know that
what your thing is inter personal
intelligence you've got like a hundred
different directions you can handle into
you know that doesn't mean you have to
only be a social worker just means you
have to be a leader of people because
you understand you like being around
people you like working with others
you're very empathetic that could be a
hundred different kinds of jobs but once
you know that it gives you a sense of
direction it's by far the most important
step for people and I always recommend
people reading this book because it's
very very important much of the reason
we lose focus as I've seen in my own
friendship group in my own family is
because of
Envy yeah how important is it to get
control of one's Envy I've heard you
describe it as the ugliest emotion well
it's ugly in the sense of you know it's
an admission that you feel inferior that
you feel that somebody is better than
you are and who wants to admit that you
know there's a very famous psychologist
named Alfred Adler from the 20s he was a
disciple of Freud he thought this
ability of always wanting to be better
and Superior to others was the most
motivating factor of 90% of human
behavior that we always want to feel at
least that we're Superior in some way
and the sense that we're inferior
creates what he calls an inferiority
complex so it's very very painful to
tell
yourself that this person is doing
better than you are or that they're
younger and better looking than you are
that their wife is is more interesting
than you year their kids are doing
better because it means it's a slight on
you right we are very prone to Envy
genetically by the way our brains
operate so it's known factor that
chimpanzees are prone to feeling Envy
right if you give one chimp a banana or
a grape and don't give another one
they'll be giving you that kind of evil
eye that we the stink eye that we we
associate with Envy so it's it's
something that's in primates and what it
comes from I believe is our brains
operate by comparison that's how we
learn that's how we understand things we
understand that this is a wild animal
because it's not that other thing over
there our brains compare bits of
information to decide what is what
what's different from what's the other
thing so our brains are geared towards
towards comparing and when you create a
social animal we are the most social
animal on the planet and you have that
bra that's constantly comparing we're
using that mechanism to compare
ourselves to other people and always
wanting what other people have and
they've noticed in Hunter Gathering
societies from back in 30,000 years ago
the few that still had existed in the
20th century that Envy was a huge
problem among them and so that when one
person was given a gift everybody in the
tribe was so upset and angry that the
person who was giving the gift had to
give it to other people so they wouldn't
be the target of Envy because it could
lead to being murdered right so Envy is
deeply ingrained in all of us we
constantly comparing ourselves to others
okay but we don't want to admit it so if
I compare myself to some other writer
who I think is having a better life than
I am who's sold more books than me what
I'll do in my mind instead of saying he
deserves that or she deserves that
because they are actually a better
writer I'll go
They Don't Really Deserve they're
they're they're a hack they're just
doing that because they know what the
public wants and they're not I'm going
to be my books are going to be read 100
years from now but nobody will read
their books in five years I justify it
to myself right I don't feel Envy no no
no I'm not saying that person's Superior
in fact they're actually inferior to me
that's the games that we play when we
Envy other people and it's something
that that social media is like a nuclear
bomb of en right so 60 years ago I
wouldn't have known what my neighbors or
friends from college are doing and how
much more money they're making and how
happy they are but now you know what
everybody on the planet is doing and how
good they are and how happy they are and
the incredible trips they're taking and
you know the the great schools that
their children are getting into on and
on and on so it's this machine for
manufacturing envy and it's infesting
our political system as well it's
seeping into all aspects of life but
nobody wants to talk about it and nobody
wants to admit it the main thing with
Envy is to admit that you feel it okay
so I will say I will get on my hands and
I will say you know
what sometimes I actually Envy Ryan
holiday he's 30 years younger than I am
he's written already more books than I
have he before I even wrote my first
book he's got a family he's got these
great homes he's doing really well yeah
sometimes I feel Envy I'll admit it okay
if you don't admit it to yourself then
it just festers and something ugly will
happen and so what I'm able to do with
the feelings of envy that I might have
is I think God Robert there's no reason
to feel that way go through a process
and
go he's actually deserved all all the
success he's had you know he deserves
because he's worked really really hard
and he's a really good person he's
ethical he deserves it and so you should
be happy for him which I am I'm
incredibly happy for him but I have that
first little twinge of envy you have to
admit it to yourself and it's not an
easy thing to admit because it means
you're admitting you feel inferior for a
moment can you use it productively that
Envy yes most definitely and I I talk in
laws of human nature about strategies
for doing that one of them
is there's somebody that you Envy in the
world well instead of festering with
that ugly emotion make that a Spur
instead of Envy feel what's called
emulation where you're going you feel
competitive and you're going to be as
good as they are or better than they are
you're going to use that sense of
inferiority to motivate you to to work
harder and harder and harder another
thing is so when somebody has failure
and we're actually kind of gleeful about
it it's called shod and Freud right the
opposite of shod and Freud is a phrase
that n called midfa which means instead
of feeling pleasure in their pain you
feel their pleasure as well so instead
of feeling Envy try and feel happy for
the other person now you'll say that I I
can't do that but yes you can you have
to practice it there's a there's a great
Psych olist Nam William James who called
it an as if strategy so just tell
yourself that I'm actually happy for
their success and when you do that it's
actually a really great
feeling to actually feel good about
somebody else doing well is a very
ennobling feeling it kind of raises you
up instead of lowering you down and
making you feel ugly it makes you feel
Noble it makes you feel better about
yourself and it kind of opens up your
whole emotional life so those are I have
other strategies in the book but those
are a couple I was wondering why your
book
power is still selling unbelievably
well I mean most books when they come
out they have their moment and then
they're done but for some reason what
you write in this book is as compelling
tempting and attractive to people now
more than ever and one would then assume
that's because people feel more
powerless
And when they see the book it offers
them a promise of something that they so
desperately want yeah is that an
accurate assessment I think it is I
think it is I mean I've noticed um in
the last six years or so the sales have
been higher than they've ever been
before and a lot of it you know young
people went through the the crash of
2008 and they had to deal with the covid
and the pandemic and in those years
where where the world seemed upside down
the book was selling better than ever so
I think
helplessness and feeling a loss of
control and feeling like there might be
something out there that can guide me a
little bit in this very confusing
anarchic times that we're living through
can be very seductive and very appealing
so I mean we've always there's always
change in our world there's always chaos
but when the world when the book came
out in 1998 eight it wasn't nearly as
chaotic as it is right now so I I think
you're right I do attribute the success
not necessarily to my Brilliance or to
the Brilliance of the book but to the
fact that people are feeling more and
more help
powerless people are lonelier than ever
according to many of the stats and when
you look at the impact that's having on
people it's equal to smoking 15
cigarettes a day According to some
reports um they're more likely to live
alone they're more likely to feel lonely
report feeling lonely they're more
likely to feel that they have no nobody
to turn to in a time of Crisis According
to some studies as well yeah um they're
more addicted than ever before you can
class that in a number of ways chemical
addictions but social media addictions
and other things and that's the state of
especially young men you know it's it's
young women too are having their own
struggles especially with anxiety and
the comparisons and those kind of things
we've talked about but young people
generally and especially young men are
killing themselves at higher rates than
ever before
um suicide as you know is one of the
biggest killers of young men what is the
antidote for this this sense of
powerlessness loneliness isolation
addiction
aimlessness well you know we our our
tendency would be to bring it down to
the individual level but I think it's
also a cultural
problem I think our culture is
contributing to it um the kind of
aimlessness in our culture where we
don't really um talk about the skills
that are necessary to get ahead our
culture promotes all kinds of bad values
it emphasizes Fame and celebrity it
doesn't talk about discipline it doesn't
give young men a sense of purpose and
Direction it doesn't value them you know
right now a lot of young men feel like
of you know it's it's women that are
getting all the attention that what why
am I you know what is my purpose here so
it's I think it's a cultural problem
more than anything else and when I say
that that kind of absolves individuals
but I don't mean to do that as well
because you are an individual you live
in this culture and you've got to get
yourself out of that kind of hole that
this culture is is imposing on you and
so I have a lot of sympathy for it
because I don't think it's completely
your your fault that you feel lonely or
that you're isolated or that you don't
have friends that you don't know how to
socialize
you know I didn't have this phone in my
hand when I was in my formative years
and I had to meet women when I when I
wanted to you know at that point in my
life in the 70s when I was in my 20s and
so I had to go out there and suffer from
rejection I had to go to bars I had to
go to clubs I had to put myself out
there and meet them and it was tough and
I learned skills seduction skills
whatever you want to call them but just
social skills skills about you know
women think differently than you they
have different values than you what are
their values get outside of yourself and
think about what it's like to be them
and what you can do that's going to
please them and get them how you can
enter into their world you have none of
that now none of that it's all you know
um swipe swipe swipe yeah so you're not
going out you're not you're not
developing that muscle you're not
putting yourself in live interacting
with people where you're feeling their
body body language their non-verbal
communication so no wonder your social
skills are atrophying and as your social
skills atrophy it becomes harder and
harder and harder to go out there and
put yourself on the line because you're
not good at it so you you have a you
fall into this hole of becoming lonelier
and lonelier because it's harder and
harder to get out of it okay so I have
tremendous empathy and I would never
like preach or or or or or blame young
men in particular for the problem that
they're having and I empathize with it
very much so because I myself went
through a phase where I felt very very
unhappy and even suicidal when I was
younger and I understand how your life
can turn that way
so I don't mean to ever come across as
somebody who has all the answers because
I think it's cultural but if you are an
individual you have to see that first of
all it's not a bad thing necessar
necessarily to be lonely part of the
problem of loneliness is it's got this
this this taboo against it this bad name
like it's terrible to be lonely terrible
to be alone right and so you feel shamed
for the fact that you're lonely but
actually it's extremely important in
life to be alone sometimes and to be
able to be on your own and to think
about yourself and to kind of come to
terms with who you are and to embrace
What Makes You Different and you can't
do that if you feel ashamed about being
lonely or if you can't ever be alone so
knowing how to be alone is very
important it's what will make you
successful it will bring you skills so
don't think of it as something
necessarily terribly negative in your
life but the other thing is you have to
force yourself you force yourself to go
to the gym to develop muscles and become
stronger you have to force yourself to
interact with people and get out of your
phone and have real experiences instead
of virtual experiences and if you do
that 10 times a month just like going to
the gym 10 times a month your social
skills will get better and better your
your social muscle will get better and
better and you'll feel better about
interacting with
people on that point you um I remember
law I think it's was law 18 I'm just
having a look that isolation yeah do not
build fortresses to protect yourself
isolation is dangerous yeah Solitude is
not a defense because it cuts you off
from valuable information allies and
opportunities there's a difference isn't
there between being lonely and being
alone because being alone is one thing
but the state of
loneliness feels like it's a slightly
different
proposition well it's the difference
between you you
feel very unhappy that you're you're not
connecting to other people we're a
social
animal right and you feel like people
don't like you they don't respect you
that you can't interact with them on a
level that's
meaningful whereas the feeling of being
alone for
me wow I don't have to be around ugly
idiotic people I can just be by myself I
can read a good book I don't have to
interact with people whose ideas I don't
like I can just be myself and be as
weird as I want wow what a relief I'm so
happy being alone now I'm not like that
all the time it would be terrible but
sometimes I do feel that way and that's
the difference and that's a good thing I
I remember once I was on an
airplane and I saw a a young woman who
was by
herself and I could sense that it was
driving her crazy and she had to use her
phone to never feel alone right even in
the middle when were flying over the
ocean she had to like somehow connect
onto the internet and be and be sending
emails and texts and anything and I got
this kind of desperation in her this
this intuition this
feeling that being alone was just
horrifying for her you know and um I
think that's not a good thing I think
it's a terrible thing so yes isolation
is bad you need to be NE you're a social
animal you're meant to be around other
people but if you can't be alone you
can't ever figure out what makes you
different and What Makes You unique so
you have to be able to play both sides
of the game to to listen to that voice
yeah inside to turn inwards hard it is
hard to turn inwards when you never have
moments of solitude I guess when you
were you said you were suicidal in your
earlier years yeah what lifted you out
of that state well I I had a girlfriend
who was very understanding who helped me
a lot so I wasn't completely alone
um and then a little tiny voice inside
of me was saying you are you have
interesting
thoughts you're a strange person Robert
I've always been strange I never was
like other people in even in high school
I was always something off about me
which could be made me lonely which
could make me be a problem but I kept
saying there's something different and
off about you right and you have skills
as a writer it's it's going to happen
someday don't give up don't give up
don't give up keep trying right and so
finally I'm 35 36 years old I was in
Italy at the lowest point of my life and
then I met this man there who was a book
packager yast
elfers and he asked me if I had an idea
for a
book and suddenly just I almost get
emotional just thinking about everything
just shifted inside of me it's like
yeah I could write a a non-fiction book
and I just improvised what would turn
into the 48 Laws of Power he got so
excited he said I will pay you to write
the the the the uh I forget what the
word is to sell it you know and um and
then I'll pay you to live while you
write it and so suddenly it went from
Darkness to to light because I had a
purpose and all of my misery you know I
could take all of the Bad Bosses I had
all of the horrible psychotic bosses who
were so stupid and so political and so
manipulative and I could go wow I've got
all this material to write the 48 Laws
of Power all my worst experiences can go
into this book it all has purpose for it
I'm not saying that's going to happen to
everybody but I was literally at that
moment before it happened pretty much
near Rock Bottom and I asked my my wife
what would have happened if this didn't
turn out would I have committed suicide
would I I if I'd gone the same path and
gotten into H done some H hack job I'd
probably be incredibly overweight and
alcoholic and I might have already died
of a heart attack or maybe I would have
found my way to something else but it
was a really really low point in my life
purpose yeah it's crazy how it can lift
you out of Darkness it can turn the
lights on yeah it's just so unbelievably
hard to find for so many people I mean
you're not going to find it in your
bedroom necessarily sat there thinking
but you
know opportunities
come you just have to be ready for them
so I had this opportunity that came to
me and you might say well that's lucky
that's never going to happen to me but
it will happen to you you're just not
ready for it you're just not recognizing
it some person will cross your path
that can lift you out of what you're
doing who could connect you but you're
not paying attention you're not ready
for it you don't think you deserve it so
there is opportunity all all the every
day of the week you're you're it's
around you is what I'm trying to say
there's so many studies and there was
one on TV by I think it was Darren Brown
The Illusionist that show certain types
of people are pessimistic towards
opportunity and when you do studies
where you and there's one particular
study where they have a newspaper and
they give it to one group of people who
I think are pessimists and one group of
people that are optimists and the the
researchers say when you find the 100
pound voucher $100 voucher just come
back to us and what happens is they
scroll through the newspaper and the
pessimists never find it but on the
first page of the newspaper it says stop
the stud stop go to the researchers now
you've won $100 The Optimist find it
well and Darren Brown did a similar
thing The Illusionist in the street
where he put I think it was a like A50
pound or 100 note in the middle of the
street as they were walking down the
street and the optimists find it they
see it but the pessimist just walk right
past it yeah I think it was a winning
scratch card potentially and that really
opened my mind to like my my state my
mental state my psychology is
determining whether I see these
opportunities yeah or totally miss them
and then it's almost a stard spiral
because then I'll think God I'm such an
unlucky person right without realizing
that I'm playing a really important role
in creating my own fortune or Misfortune
right yeah I have a chapter in laws of
human nature about the nature of your
attitude creates your circumstances
which is sort of the same thing you're
saying which is there are two kinds of
attitudes that I talk about one is a clo
an attitude that's closing that's
constrictive that's narrow and there's
one that's expansive and open you could
call that pessimistic and optimistic but
the closed um attitude is you're only
seeing life through this narrow little
Spectrum where everything everything is
bad people don't like you there's
hostility all around you and what that
means is you're not seeing reality
you're creating reality you're creating
that reality you're seeing it and that's
what happens to you the expansive
attitude is life is amazing all these
incredible things are possible I have
hope any moment there could be an
opportunity and that's not reality
either but you're going to create that
Reality by feeling that way and taking
seing an opportunity the the smallest
crumb of an opportunity you're going to
create those good
circumstances so by your attitude you
create the bad things that happen to you
in life one of the um sort of adjacent
points here about purposelessness about
loneliness about the struggles and
plights of young men in the world that
they face and and young women is the
conversation around pornography if you
go on many of the social media apps
these days you will be exposed to pretty
explicit pornography whether you you
researching for or not there's certain
apps in particular where even if I'm
scrolling on my feed certain things will
pop up and I get Jesus Christ like you
know I'm at work here um and I was
thinking about this more broadly because
the studies show that about I think it's
like 80% of men and about 40% of women
in the United States use pornography and
I wondered if you had a view on how it
robs us of the of the hard work it takes
to form romantic
relationships
um and if the act of consuming
pornography is robbing us of the desire
for the real thing well it it's it's an
addiction and you have to understand
that you are being manipulated that you
are being programmed that these people
have figured out exactly the kinds of
things the kinds of images that are
going to hook you and you're being
played you're a fool they're playing
with you just like Mark Zuckerberg and
Facebook knows all the algorithms to
hook you to his to to the news feed
you're being played by by the images
they know how to create and keep you
always wanting more just like fast food
has all these tricks to constantly you
be eating their Doritos or whatever it
is okay but the other thing
is um so I'm not going to preach and
moralize about pornography from a a
prudish aspect of it because I'm not
approved but I have a
chapter in the book that I'm writing on
the Sublime on what I called love
Sublime and the act of loving not God
not the universe but another human being
and individual man or woman gay or
straight or whatever it is and how
Sublime that is and what it is is in
that
relationship the boundaries between the
two of you are allowed to melt and your
your ego can soften and you can feel
their world and they can feel your world
and you have a connection that for a
social animal is the highest form of
connection it's Superior to a religious
connection I'm sorry um and what it
requires is we we have the expression
falling in love and it literally is
falling it's like you fall fall fall
fall fall you're open and You're
vulnerable and you're letting yourself
fall and when you're not what stops you
from doing that is you don't want to be
hurt you don't want to be vulnerable
right because if you open yourself to
someone else you're likely to get hurt
and so the moment there's a disagreement
between you or there's a moment where a
friend says something nasty about this
person you're interested in you stop
falling you cut it off and that romantic
thing ends and dies but if you get past
that and you allow yourself to open up
completely and you just keep falling
falling and falling and falling
this incredible thing can happen and I
describe it to and I describe it the
Dynamics of that and examples of that
and why for a social animal it's like
the ultimate experience and so
pornography is completely robbing you of
that because love of another human being
is a sense of
Enchantment right there's like this this
spark that's happening this electricity
and it's obviously viously sex is
involved so it's a very physical
relationship as well but it goes beyond
that it also has a kind of spiritual
component right but it's a sense of
Enchantment Where the world becomes
alive to Everything Is Beautiful in the
world in those moments right and
pornography is disenchanting you from
everything it's making it all mechanical
and ugly and and and it it has no
romance to it it has no Dimension to it
it's almost as if the two humans
involved in it or however are like
machine parts right they're not human
anymore and there's no emotion involved
there's no kind of spiritual connection
it's depressing it's really really
depressing when I see it I feel really
sorry that I experienced this and I feel
really sorry for the people who are in
that industry I find it really really
ugly and alienating
now I'm not as a said a prud and I under
and I could
watch a moov a great movie with a love
scene in it and it's very exciting and
beautiful but the seduction element the
element of I saw a movie recently a
Japanese movie by the great director U
from the
50s and there was a man who was married
and he was about to have an affair with
this woman who was kind of seducing
him and they had this kiss I go I
thought wow W I was getting I use the
word turned on but I was getting really
excited it was so full of emotion and
energy and it made the sexual element so
much more powerful by the element of
Romance by the element of something kind
of transgressive there was no nude
bodies there was no sex you ever get to
see but the leadup to it and the nature
of the emotions evolved made it to me
deeply deeply exciting and if young men
particular can't have that experience if
everything is so mechanical is so
computerized it's going to be like AI
it's going to be like AI sex you know
then you're losing your soul you're
losing your capacity for really falling
in love for really having that kind of
dimensional experience which by the way
can be extremely physical and it can
only last for three months I'm not
saying it has to be 20 years with one
woman or one man it could be for three
months
but it enriches you it create it makes
you more
human I've invested more than a million
pounds into this company Perfect Ted and
they're also a sponsor of this podcast I
switched over to using matcher as my
dominant energy source and that's where
perfect Ted comes in they have the
matcha powders they have the matcha
drinks they have the pods and all of
this keeps me focused throughout a very
very long recording day no matter what's
going on and their team is obsessed with
quality which is why they Source their
ceremonial grade matcher from Japan so
when people say to me that they don't
like the taste of matcha I'm guessing
that they haven't tried perfect Ted
unlike lowquality matcha that has a
bitter grassy taste perfect Ted is
smooth and naturally sweet and without
knowing it you're probably a perfect
headed customer already if you're
getting your match at places like blank
Street or Joe in the juice but now you
can make it yourself at home so give it
a try and we'll see if you still don't
like matcha so here's what I'm going to
do I'm going to give you 40% off are
match if you try it today head to
perfect ted.com and use code
st40 or if you're in a supermarket you
can get it at tesos or Holland and
Barrett or in the Netherlands at Albert
Hine and those of you in the US you can
get it on
Amazon the other thing that a couple of
psychologists on my podcast before have
alluded to on this subject is that they
told me about a study with rats where
they messed with the part of the rat's
brain that is responsible for causing
dopamine and then when they put food in
front of the rat's mouth if the rat was
it was like 6 in from the rat's mouth
the rat would starve to death because
they had impacted the rat's dopamine so
it no longer had motivation and they
speak of dopamine as the sort of
motivation chemical it's the thing that
gets you to take action so if you're
frying your dopamine receptors by doing
these sort of high dopamine activities
oh right right I'm wondering if you're
going to if we're we're sort of breeding
a a culture of lower motivation
individuals and because of this Eis I
was kind of looking at some some studies
around this and it does say that
constant exposure to high dopamine
activities can lead to dopamine
desensitization or deregulation of
dopamine receptors and then this can
lead to a significant reduction in your
motivation and there's multiple studies
here that um point in this direction so
I'm wondering how when I look at some of
the stats around purposeless and people
having less partners and being more
sexless if there's a through line here
that when you make dopamine easy through
pornography we're less likely to go in
get up out of our bedroom and take Tak
action yeah but it's not just
pornography there's too much of that in
in social media as well on on other
levels so
um you know you have to we're we're you
have to understand what it means to be a
human being first of all and we're
physical animals we can't be in our
heads all the time we we think with our
bodies right we we think with the
chemical mixing in our bodies we're very
physical and we're social animals to the
core and that Social Animal what makes
us Superior is that we connect I can
kind of look at you and I can maybe
understand what you're feeling what
you're thinking and we can have a
discussion and our ideas can go back and
forth and connect and go to higher
levels of understanding or lower levels
of disagreement but that's what it means
to be a human being you're not this
[__] AI machine you're you're not a
bot you're not an algorithm you're not a
little piece of data that Mark
Zuckerberg can mix with you're you're a
human being with a body with physical
problems with hormones with emotions
that are coursing through you and you
have to become a physical creature which
means doing things in the world taking
action working building a business doing
things with your hands you know exercise
meeting people be inside of your bodies
and when you're in pornography you're
disembodied you're not in your body you
might be wanking off as far as I know
you know probably are but you're not
really inside of your body in any
meaningful way and
so it's like my hope if there's any hope
is that and there's seeds of it in the
world now where young people are going
to start getting disgusted with this
because the human spirit is still very
powerful and it's still like
I don't want to be like this it doesn't
feel natural it doesn't feel right and
at some point my hope is in 20 30 Years
After I'm probably dead there'll be a
movement where people are going to be so
against this that they're going to go in
the opposite direction they're going to
be returning to what it means to be
human being there'll be a rekindling of
interest in our past in the Primitive
past in the Pagan past things I'm
writing about in in my book right now
and I've see things like that sometimes
like in the New York times they had an
article a few weeks ago about a group of
young people in college who hate social
media and absolutely refuse it and will
not it's like almost like a fraternity
or a sorority they will not allow
anybody into their group who ever looks
at their phone they go yay yay right on
brother I could have if I'm in college
right now I would join that not that I
think everything is evil I have my own
phone Etc but if I were young that sense
of this is a nasty world I want to
return to what it means to be a human
being I want to spark a movement a
revolution that goes back to that I hope
that that's going to happen I hope
that's in the cards what is it about
human nature that we just don't want to
admit well
um first of all we don't want to admit
um where we came from our our primitive
roots that we are animals you know that
before we invented language you know we
were living like any other animal on the
in the outdoors right
and um I remember one day I was I was in
Sydney Australia about 10 12 years ago
and they have this amazing zoo I don't I
hate zoos because I I'm an animal lover
and I think zoos are like prisons but I
I wanted to see the strange exotic
animals there and they had this
amazing chimpanzee compound right where
the chimpanzees could kind of roam
around freely and I was fascinated and I
sat there for like two hours because it
was like watching an office in Manhattan
or something where there was the alpha
male and all the other males were kind
of following behind him like you know
like the CEO of a
company and I was looking around and I
noticed all the people were like
giggling and they were so embarrassed
and they couldn't they were make they
were laughing that was their
reaction because it made them so
uncomfortable to see this animal that's
so much like a human being but is also
still an animal they were just so
uncomfortable by it it made me realize
that we're very very uncomfortable with
that aspect of ourselves right the part
that we can't really control so much
that isn't logical that isn't rational
that isn't clean doesn't you know all
these civilized things so we're in deep
denial of our animal Roots but we're
also in denial of our own nature so we
want to imagine ourselves to be these
kind of saintly moral rational creatures
always thinking about what's good for
other people you know and it's just a
fairy tale that's not the world as it is
you know it's the world more like I
described in the 48 Laws of Power where
people are manipulative where people are
playing games not everyone but everyone
has a manipulative side everyone has a
dark side we actually are deeply
irrational creatures we don't want to
admit it we don't want to admit the
parts of the of our self that reflect
this kind of animal nature our
irrationality our our aggression our um
the envy that we feel towards other
people it's always other people who are
like that so I give the example of
narcissism and I try to make the point
in the book in narcissism you know I
make the point that everybody's
self-absorbed you know when you're
reading book and you see your birthday
happens to be there just a fact you're
like whoa that's my birthday because
it's you your astrological sign that's
me we all are interested in ourselves
we're all self-absorbed right and when
we somebody suddenly talks about us our
ears prick up I'm not moralizing it it's
just the truth it's me it's it's
everyone we don't want to admit it it's
always somebody else it's always Donald
Trump is the n it's always Elon mus was
narcissist everybody has narcissistic
Tendencies that's human nature and and
we're we want to deny it and should we
be aspiring to not be narcissists or
does one just accept their narcissistic
Tendencies and lean into it because much
of what I read in the book about power
is how narcissism seems to get you
ahead to some degree that's that's
that's debatable but um but I mean look
at some of the people that you know we
we've been talking about that have
reached the very top of the professional
pyramid in life you know the presidents
and such they've got narcissistic traits
sure sure and uh and some of them are
are kind of what I call Deep narcissists
who are very problematic and some of
them are healthy narcissists so a lot of
artists are what I would call a healthy
narcissist so a lot of art artists
aren't necessarily the best people right
they're not all often you know you
wouldn't may want to be their friend
they maybe not the most faithful person
as as far as the partner is concerned
but they put all of that narcissistic
energy into their work and they create
beautiful things that contribute to
humanity Steve Jobs was not a very nice
person right he was very aggressive he
was very assertive and he was a control
freak but look what he created okay
that's healthy narcissism what's the
first thing they tell you in AA I've not
been an AA but I know it it's admitting
that you're an alcoholic okay if you
can't admit you're an alcoholic how are
you ever going to stop being an
alcoholic but you first have to admit it
so if you want to stop being a
narcissist you have to get on your hands
and knees and admit that you are a
narcissist because if you deny it and
you say everybody else is if you can't
look inward how can you ever change that
and even the most saintly person on this
planet the Mahatma Gandhi the Martin
Luther Kings they had definite strong
narcissistic Tendencies there are no
Saints in this world everybody has these
have these Tendencies so get off your
high horse look Inward and see those
traits that are narcissistic within you
what if I'm dealing with a narcissist
well who isn't in this world today
you're always dealing with a
narcissist what do I do about that do I
because I was thinking about some of the
laws in your book where you say things
like don't outshine the master yeah if
I'm dealing with a narcissist should I
hide my strengths and my weaknesses in
order to sort of Pander to them and not
outshine
them yes but as part of law number
one is this is the great thing about
being a human being you can do two
things at once you can be consciously
playing the game of I'm not going to out
China because he's he or she's going to
fire me because I'm going to make them
feel insecure but at the same time in my
head I'm going
I'm not that person isn't better than me
they don't deserve their position
they're actually kind of incompetent
stupid and Someday by being loyal and
learning from them I'm going to rise up
and I'm being smart because I have to
I'm a social animal and then at that
point I can just say get away from me I
don't need you anymore I'm better than
you you can outshine them but you play
the game but the worst thing is if you
internalize it and go I actually am
inferior I'm not going to outshine
because I'm not a good person I don't
deserve it and then you've internalized
this sense of inferiority and it's going
to haunt you the rest of your life so
you can play both sides of the game at
the same time you talk about acting in
in life to get ahead do we have to be
actors in your view well this is where I
start getting a little bit cranky
Stephen because everybody's an
actor right nobody admits it
though when you're 3 years old you're
already acting right you're crying
because you're trying to get your
parents' attention you're you're making
trouble with your siblings because
you're trying to get something that you
want you're learning to be manipulative
children are very manipulative children
are consummate actors they learn that
they can get what they want by behaving
a certain way if I'm an angel Mommy will
give me this and the other thing even
though I know I'm not an
angel we are a social animal and we have
words we have language language and with
words and language we can say one thing
and be another we can lie we can deceive
we can tell people I loved your
screenplay you were fantastic in the mo
movie man you're looking so great today
we don't mean any of it but we can do
that because we have words and we can
lie about that we are all actors if
everyone went around saying exactly what
they felt about the other person no one
would ever get along we would have
killed ourselves off by now you're
always telling the L the things that
they want to hear you're always telling
your partner you're always kind of
hedging exactly what you feel you're an
actor I don't I don't understand what's
so complicated about that I don't
understand why people can't see that
they're every day of their life and in
another
instance you're never the same with two
different people the way you are in
front of your father as you are in front
of your son or in front of a colleague
you're completely different person your
jokes are different your body language
is different you're an actor okay some
people are good at it some people aren't
but you're an actor well I think the
root of this is there's something ugly
about being manipulation lying acting so
no one would want to volunteer that they
are doing that but from what I'm
inferring from what you said is that in
order to get ahead in life you're going
to need to lie a little bit manipulate
and act well you you are it's not like
you need to be you are doing that even
though you may not admit it you are
doing that you see the thing is it's
getting back to that scene at the Sydney
Zoo where people are deeply
uncomfortable with these aspects of
their own character and their own
personality and I don't want you to go
around thinking God it's great to be
manipulative it's great to just screw
people over and get what I want and not
care about them no but it's better to
admit that you are are capable of
manipulation that you do it often
unconsciously and often in a passive
aggressive manner it's better to admit
it and it's better to be able to play
the game when you have to like always
say less than necessary is going to save
you a lot of pain you don't have to go
around all your life practicing these
things I don't think you want to what
was that law always say less than
necessary can number four can you
explain that one to me in looking at
powerful people the person who talks
less always gives off a greater Aura of
power than the people that are yabbering
all the time that are talking that can't
control their tongue and the idea is if
you can't control your mouth if you just
keep talking and talking it gives it
Aura to other people that you can't
control anything else you have no
self-control and that is very unpower
Aura and obvious the more you talk the
more you are prone to say something kind
of stupid and irrational that you're
going to regret and so powerful people
know to command an
audience they sit there they let other
people talk and argue and then
occasionally they utter something that's
maybe a little bit ambiguous if goes
whoa oh that's very interesting Robert
said that what does that mean you look
powerful right you give off an air of
mystery you give off an air of control
and so a lot of people have a hard time
with it because they think well
shouldn't I just be able to say whatever
I want and just talk well no you don't
not in the social world not in the work
world it's going to get you in trouble
learn to control what you talk and learn
that there are moments that saying less
is actually much more powerful than just
yammering on and on I was um through my
years of business running businesses and
stuff I came up with this idea which
I've shared with a few people called
your contribution score and much like we
have a credit score where if we you know
we're Reckless with our finances we our
credit score gets lowered um I think the
same applies for the contributions we
make in group settings but just
generally the contributions we make and
I came to learn this over time because
in one of my offices many years ago in a
different company there was this one
individual who in the meeting rooms
would when people were
brainstorming before they'd thought of
what they were going to say they they'd
interject and say what about um if we do
a we could do like a popup with maybe
we'll do like T you they were thinking
out loud and what was what I would
observe as the CEO is the minute they
spoke
it was almost like people roll rolled
their eyes and tried to cut them off
because they developed this contribution
score which says when ex person
contributes it's always ill formed um
not productive and takes too long but
then there's this other guy who I
remember from my Manchester office who
went he hardly spoke and every time he
spoke it wasn't important so the minute
he starts speaking it's like the room
shifts towards him like like with baited
breath so there's an art of protecting
one's contribution score yeah I remember
uh 50 I would go to meetings with
him 50 Cent yeah and he would hardly say
anything and people would be trembling
my God he's not talking he's not saying
he's interested in my ideas he just sit
there b was kind of Ry smile on his face
and then when he'd say something oh they
would let out of breath oh he's saying
something it'd be very short and Curt
but he completely commanded the room
because he just sat there as if he
wasn't really happy with what people
were doing and it made them compete to
make him happy
interesting really interesting he he's a
master of the
4 the other law that I was thinking a
lot about if we're jumping back to the
the laws of power is let others do the
work but take the
credit you face when I said that well
you know some of the 48 Laws is irony
and you know people have to be able to
understand and read what's ironic
so um like I have a chapter in there
play on people's need to believe to
create a cult like
following and I'm not really saying go
out and create a cult I'm showing you
why you might be in a cult right now
because this is how Cults operate okay
so when I worked in
Hollywood I worked at one point for a
film
director and we had this process where
we would sit in a room and we would talk
about the the story and we would discuss
the dialogue ofu and I would give all of
this dialogue and ideas in there and
he'd be WR be writing it down and I'm
not saying half the screenplay but at
least a third or fourth were like my
ideas my contribution my dialogue I
never got a single credit for any of it
it was always his name that was on there
people go wow bro that was so funny that
was really brilliant I love that line
was my line okay okay so I learned this
is the law of the Jungle when you're
working in particularly in entertainment
in media people take your work and they
put their name on it so like when you're
watching a television show with some uh
news broadcast or whatever or an
interviewer their jokes aren't their own
they didn't write those jokes they had a
team of people writing it all those
great facts that are coming up a team of
researchers are putting there you never
hear their names you never know who they
are they took the work and they put
their name on it that's the law of the
Jungle and the law of the Jungle is
don't get upset about it it's part of
the game you I got upset when that
happened I didn't say anything I didn't
do anything but I got resentful nobody's
recognizing my work whne whne whne wine
wine the adult if I had been smarter was
that's just how it is Robert just calm
down at some point people will see your
screenplays or your books or whatever
and you'll be fine
but just I'm trying to show you this is
how the world operates and don't be so
naive and don't think it's not like that
and if you had kicked up a fuss you
might have accidentally outshone the
master of or i' been fired it's
interesting because there is an element
of this where it can where like trying
to take the credit can really also lead
you to being fired because I'll never I
remember back in previous again a
previous company that I had started had
a big team about 200 people in
Manchester and there was this one kid
in his early 20s who would always sulk
if in our like public company Channel
someone just innocently forgot to
include his name
in credit when credit was being handed
out and it would happen maybe once every
six months you just like forgot that he
had contributed to the project and that
happens in all businesses people don't
take you sometimes and I remember
hearing that he was outside on the steps
bitching that's the best way I can
describe it just like complaining to
other younger team members that he
hadn't been included in that message and
it developed this horrible Rel um
reputation for him as someone that was
always complaining and always trying to
take credit because it's ugly to be seen
as trying to take
credit well so if you read the law
carefully it's really about how powerful
people use this so if you're an
underling and you do the work don't you
don't want to take credit for it because
it's going to get you in trouble right
but powerful people
have used for centuries the labor of
other people and put their name on it to
make themselves look powerful and to
make them seem like they've got endless
energy okay so you have to apply that
law with intelligence if you're an
underling and you're doing some project
it's a group project don't go out there
and take credit for it because people
are just going to laugh at you and
you're going to make you're going to
make a terrible fool of yourself so
every law has a context you know but
that's that's powerful people use that
law and if you don't think that's how it
operates I'm sorry but you're in you're
in for a world of pain I think there's
an overarching thing here which which
can be discovered in your other book the
laws of human nature about mastering
your emotional self yeah because none of
these things are going to be possible if
you don't have Mastery over your
emotions I'm not going to be able to
refrain from snatching credit I'm not
going to be able to not outshine my
master if I don't have this sort of
foundation of emotional control is that
true is emotional control really where
this all begins yes it it is
self-control um of course you can take
it too far where you have no emotions
and you're just a cold fish out there
you know it's good emotions are
important you're not going to write a
book you're not going to start a
business unless you're excited unless
you have that emotional energy so I'm
not talking about stifling your emotions
that would be incredibly
counterproductive and
unpower but there are emotions that are
going to get you in trouble particularly
as a social animal so it's not like you
stifle your emotions you learn how to
channel and control them and you learn
that certain behaviors are going to be
read as unpower as hysterical as
somebody who can't get things done as
ineffective incompetent so as an actor
you learn to sort of present the right
front the right facade and that requires
a degree of emotional control yes for
sure it's very important and it's not
easy because when you're young
particularly you're very em you're wired
to be emotional and you're going to
learn this the hard way which is how I
learned it I'm trying to teach you some
lessons so maybe you won't make as many
mistakes but it's a hard thing you learn
and you learn it by the mistakes you
make by saying something foolish that
costs you your job by outshining the
master that costs you your job you learn
it from the mistakes you make is there
any practices that you know of that
would enable me to increase my
self-awareness because you know I we're
all going through experiences in life
but it seems that some people are
learning from those experiences and
becoming more wise and more effective
and then other people are kind of
repeating the cycle over and over again
and I think I asked this in particular
because you're a writer so you spend a
ton of time thinking thinking about
what's happened to you your jobs
experiences your
feelings if if if you do a a foolish
mistake
there are two ways to go and the common
route is that [__] they they screwed
me over it's their fault you know right
or I made that mistake but you know if
circumstances been better if I had more
money if this person supported me it
would have all would have gone well
that's what we naturally do and that's
the kind of person that never learns
from life so your first instinct must
always be and not your first instinct I
correct myself your second inct inct
because your first instinct is always
going to be that there's a great book I
can't remember what the writer's name
was mistakes were made but not by me I
recommend that book highly it came out
about 10 years ago I think it's Elliot
Aronson oh yeah I know him uh very good
book anyway your first instinct always
will be it was a mistake but I it wasn't
my I'm not to blame all right everybody
does it I do it your second instinct is
to sit back and whoa wait a minute
that's not right i'm fooling myself
actually I played a role in that in in
what happened there and what is that
role that I played what could I have
done differently maybe it's very subtle
maybe it was something in my body
language that turned people off that
made them not like me or maybe it was
something I said or I did that could
have changed the circumstances what is
it that I did then you can learn from
the experience and if only 10% of it is
your
responsibility at least see it as 30% so
that you can learn from it and
exaggerate your role in the mistake
because then you can learn from it you
can understand that you can correct
these mistakes right so initially you're
going to always blame the other person
then you're going to step back and
you're going to go through this little
dance you're going to go no I think I I
I've definitely played a part in what
went wrong
here things go wrong and we leap to
blame and once we leap to blame we often
leap to Revenge yeah we want to take
revenge we want to write the wrong
that's happened to us we want to correct
the Injustice and you talk about this as
part of human nature but also give us
some advice I think it was in it was
actually in the law of power book about
um I think it was law
36 when we feel like we've been wronged
Robert when we feel like there's been an
injustice what is the best course of
action it depends on on on the wrong and
in the Injustice so let me give you an
example someone at work said I had they
said something to my boss and it's cost
me my promotion and they're talking
about me behind my back and and it's
annoying
me well there are several um avenues
that you can go everything depends on
circumstances so if you're going to be a
strategist in life is is what I
recommend you have to look at the
particular parameters and not just go
there's one answer there's several
possibilities here here so number one
maybe you're in an awful job with awful
office
politics I have a a thing that I get
talked about in one of my recent talks
um of you can scale a culture of a group
on a scale of zero to 100 100 is what I
call a Reality Group where people are
only interested in getting the job done
and everything is on results zero is
where everything is political and
everything is personal and everything is
about who knows who and how you brown
knows your way with the boss okay so if
you're at a company that's at that 20%
level then get your ass out of there
okay you you have a colleague like that
but they're probably other colleagues
like that and that person is probably
always causing problems do you need to
be at this job is the main thing you
have to first ask yourself and if it you
do need it you need the job and it's
only this one
person then you have to go through a few
steps number one
is it worth taking
personally what if I not take the high
root because I hate that that phrase but
what if I say it's not really worth it
for me to get upset it's better off in
the long run to just act like um you
know it didn't happen and to end up
getting the promotion on my own in a
different way and proving myself as
success is the best revenge you know and
how can I get there kind of thing
ignoring ing him or her and what they
did and only focusing on what you can do
to get back to get the promotion that
you deserve the third possibility is
sticking it to this other person which
is always something that I think is is
something you might have to consider
doing right which is playing the game
back at them so when you're dealing with
people who are
unethical like a Putin kind of t Tye
where they're willing to do anything to
get power and you're not it's
asymmetrical Warfare they have more
options than you do okay this person
that did that to you they're going to do
anything for power and it puts you at a
constant disadvantage what do you do you
have to do what they have in Warfare
called the deterrent strategy you have
to show this person that you're not
somebody you can mess with that you're
going to do something to hurt them but
it's controlled and it's a one-time
thing you're going to damage their
reputation you're going to spread some
nasty rumor about them but it's you
don't have to feel like you're lowering
yourself it's just I'm doing it one time
to show them that from now on you better
not mess with me because damn it I've
got a gun in my back pocket and I can
use it you can't be you can't just lay o
roll over because they're going to keep
doing it to you time and again so you've
got three options and you've got to
choose what's the best one if you hate
your job and you can't get around the
this person quit if you don't feel
comfortable going the low road and if
you think it's a better strategy in the
long term for you and your soul and your
safety to Simply focus on your job and
and get revenge that way that's probably
the best solution of all but sometimes
you need to have a shot across their bow
to say look you can't attack me because
if you do they're going to be
consequences to pay because these types
of people they they prey on those who
seem weakest right predat say love prey
yeah but if you do the option number
two and you show that you don't really
that they didn't affect you and you kind
of act like it didn't matter sort of
thing but you still work hard and you're
still doing your
job they might they're going to wonder
like hm that's pretty impressive that's
interesting this person has
self-control and they're may be going to
be afraid of you in that sense by the
fact by the closure that you show them
so everything depends on who you are
your nature and the nature of this this
uh Machiavellian character that you're
facing you know but um be alive to the
moment and the
circumstances and play for the long game
so sometimes the long game means showing
that you can mean action because then
they're going to leave you alone for the
next couple of years when we zoom out on
what's going on in the world um a lot
has changed a lot has changed one of the
things that's changed is our society as
I think I've heard you say is less
United by some of these great myths of
religion and you know I've heard you say
talk about democracy and all these kinds
of things and as a result people no
longer believe in the same ideas because
every form of authority is now under
question and you someone who studies
history you're someone that understands
the cycles of history what cycle of
History are we in at this moment in time
and how does one navigate it well um you
have to take a big picture um especially
if if you're someone like me who studies
history a lot so there are always these
moments in history of cycles of
chaos where and it could be caused in
the past by a plague by some terrible
war that goes on like the Hundred Years
War in
Europe where um people feel genuinely
powerless and helpless and there's a
crisis of meaning in the world and I
could point to specific moments in the
ancient world in
Asia in Europe but it goes on and on
it's a cycle that happens and when
people feel powerless and helpless and
there's all this chaos going around them
then they tend to be attracted to
authoritarian figures to easy solutions
that they get much more irrational
they're much more likely to fall for
Cults and for belief systems that offer
Simple Solutions and easy one sentence
answers like make America great again
kind of thing you know wow that sounds
that's simple it's easy yeah that's
we'll vote for that right so in moments
of chaos and helplessness people are
going to grab for something that anchors
them that gives them a sense of per
meaning right but it's often something
very very dangerous
us so we're in a moment like that right
now I think around the world it's not
just the United
States Believe It or Not things can
happen under the skin and and and are
subtle like climate change there are a
lot of people who don't believe in
climate change but it's affecting
everyone it's making everyone a bit
neurotic the sense that we can't control
our climate right that these disasters
are going to keep happening and
happening that's a major sense of
helplessness the global economy where
now your business is at the mercy of
something that's going on in Indonesia
or Japan or China is a tremendous sense
of helplessness and a lack of control
and your political figures don't seem to
be responding to you in any way like
their actions their talk doesn't lead to
the kind of results that you want so
you're very prone to following what
demagogues say who offer you like easy
solutions okay so if you're living in a
time like that and it's more dangerous
now than in the past because of social
media and because of memes and because
of the viral effects that are sweeping
through Humanity right they didn't have
that during the Bubonic plague during
the 100 Years War during the French and
Industrial Revolution which was another
period of incredible dramatic change in
Europe at the turn of the 19th century
right so they didn't have that which is
adds to the brew and makes it much more
dangerous
so having a longer view is to say well
you know this is a moment moment of
chaos and I'm going to be in control of
what I think and what I believe so I'm
going to have a degree of distrust of
what people are telling me I'm not going
to get so emot
when people start saying this is what's
evil this is what's wrong with the world
and to be very very very wary of people
with Simple Solutions who say if we just
do this one thing everything will be
great if we just add tariffs if we just
get rid of all the immigrants America
will be fabulous these are fairy tales
that are being pedal to you I'm not
trying to be political because the other
side pedal their own kinds of fairy
tales believe me I understand that can I
ask you a question about this book um
which is kind of linked to what you're
saying now the 48 Laws of
Power what demographic emails you the
most about the
book young
men young men voted for Trump I know
you're someone that I sense and from
what I've understood from my research
isn't a big fan of trump and so what
what what do you say to those people
about why you you have that position and
what their misunderstanding potentially
the thing uh I do want to say is that
you want to be able to think for
yourself okay so let's say you think
Trump is the answer he's going to have
he's going to solve all of our problems
well be capable of stepping back and
going maybe some of the things he's
doing I don't agree with aren't right
you know have some discrimination have
some self-distance how be able to crit
criticize your own side so I'm on on on
the left on the Democratic liberal side
they are buffoons they are fools they
are absolutely incompetent and I don't
afraid to say it they make terrible
mistakes they blew this election they're
stupid and it's painful to say that
because it's the side that I support but
I do not believe in everything that they
Pro promote there are things I disagree
with them on them some of their woke
policies I just find her ludicrous okay
so be able to say stand back and say I
don't agree with everything he says have
some dignity have some self-worth say
that I can think for myself and not get
so
emotional right so you think being
masculine and being a bro is just say oh
Robert F you you're such an idiot you're
so blah blah blah blah blah you know put
YouTube comments because I get them all
the time you know F you you you you can
fill in the blanks right that's not
being masculine that's not being tough
or strong that's being an idiot because
you're not able to think for yourself
right being emotional isn't
masculinity masculinity is self-control
I'm afraid being masculine is being able
to step back and
go this isn't necessarily the right
thing to do I have to think about it I
have to do something that's more
productive that's positive I have to
criticize myself sometimes weak people
can't criticize them himself
so if you're listening to me at least be
willing to say that maybe some of my
ideas are wrong my ideas and your ideas
right that to me is strength that to me
is a masculine virtue being able to
criticize your own side and not get
always so emotional and overheated and
leaving nasty YouTube comments as as I'm
sure I'm going to get right
now you made me reflect on something I
read the other day I think it was on x
and it was a study that shows that when
the more testosterone you have again
which we can use as like a proxy for
masculinity in studies you're more
likely to think for yourself so they had
two groups of um two groups of people
and they gave one group of um people
testosterone I think it was a group of
men testosterone they both had to do
this test and the ones who had the
higher testosterone levels had been
given like the artificial testosterone
they were less likely to cave in to
external social expectation wow which I
thought was it's appr proxy for what
you're saying which is right on
potentially real masculinity is having
the the strength of your own convictions
and being able to ignore social pressure
to conform you you talked about wokeness
in the left and how they messed it up
yeah I consider myself to be I'd say
apolitical but it's more this sounds
like a strange thing to say I can just
see the merits and things on both sides
so I really struggle to identify with a
side I I think okay that's good for the
economy that's good for different social
classes and stuff and and so I I also
just have I think a a very strong
negative reaction to the binary choice
that you're kind of forced to make yeah
right I agree I just you know so I just
I've always kind of stayed out of it in
that regard but in terms of this
wokeness and the the way that the left
have screwed it up what have they got
wrong well um and what's Trump got right
I guess well I don't know it's it's it's
too pain for me to say what Trump got
right right well you going to be able to
uh I know well he he is I'll tell you
what he's he gets right and what he's
really brilliant at which is
communication and messaging so the
Democrats completely suck at that right
they couldn't craft a message to save
their life if if they were you know if
if everything depended on it they're
just terrible at it they don't know how
to communicate they don't know how to
make a simple message now I said simple
messages can be deceptive but in
politics you have to have something like
that you have to stand for a vision for
something straight and you have to be
strong and you have to be willing to
fight for it so I do have the ear of
some people in the Democratic party and
I say what you got wrong and what Trump
got right is to show the public that you
are Fighters that you are strong that
you believe in something and that you're
willing to upset other people other
groups because you believe in certain
things he a large portion of the public
he doesn't care about he he's interested
in his base he doesn't care if he's
hated okay Democrats don't care if you
put if you upset this special interest
group or that special interest group
some people have to hate you being hated
is a good thing stand for something and
be willing to fight you got that all
wrong he got that right so I'm can to
admit that and he's much better at
communicating and messaging okay when it
comes to
policies there's there's a pretty big
Gulf between us about what I think is
good and bad but
I mean wokeness
is it it's an ideology that isn't really
connected to Everyday Life to the to to
to what's going on around us right it's
it's kind of a purity test of these are
certain things that we hold and you
better either if you believe in them
you're on the good side and if you don't
believe them you're on the wrong side
it's a polarity it's a black and white
binary way of looking at the world and
that's not reality that's not how things
are things aren't black and white things
have a gray Zone yes there are things
that are evil murder is evil you know
social injustice we can all agree on
certain social injustices yeah but it's
not like this purity test of if you
don't believe in this you are an evil
bad person you know so on the Israel
Palestine issue for instance now I
happen to be Jewish right um and I've
never been a Zionist my whole life I'm
very happy to be Jewish I was Bar
Mitzvah and I have nothing against it
and I'm I'm not a practicing religious
person in Judaism I understand because I
lost a large part of my ancestry during
the Holocaust was deeply part of my
childhood a very traumatic thing that my
even my parents were still recovering
from so when it comes to Israel
Palestine I'm very conflicted because
I've met
Palestinians who had a terrible impact
on me as they describe the horror of
what happened to them and how the loss
of their land and How Deeply what a
beautiful country Palestine was and how
traumatic it was to lose their home but
at the same
time Jews were completely homeless from
the
Holocaust and they did originate from
this land I can see both sides and it's
very painful and if I were to craft a
solution first of all I I think
Netanyahu is is is a horrible person but
there is a middle ground that could be
had where there could be a two-state
solution but the woke people oh God
forget it man you're just you're just
you're you're in favor of genocide get
out of here that's not life that's not
reality that's not how the world works
it's not how things happen in this world
you're not dealing with the real world
you're just trying to act like you're
morally pure you're not really willing
to sacrifice to roll up your sleeves and
come up with practical Solutions you
just want to yell and rant and act and
look like you're you're the most
virtuous person on the planet but isn't
this one of the laws of human
nature fitting into our tribes and
because I think being in the being in
the sort of political middle or wherever
I am you get attacked from both sides
because sometimes you'll have a
conversation with this person and
they'll say oh my God you're you're
rightwing I'll have a conversation with
this person and they'll say oh my God
you're a left wing and so you just you
never fit and actually my my instinct is
tempted my instinct my sort of like my
primitive instinct is like just [__]
pick a side Steve and then at least
you'll have you'll have a bunch of
people to protect you you talk about
that as well how having a group of
people around you and not being in
isolation offers protection yeah so it's
it's
tempting it's tempting but you're going
to lose your soul you're going to lose
your dignity in the process so it's fine
to be part of a group I
remember uh I was a young man in
1983 I was on the left for sure I don't
deny it I went to Nicaragua to report as
a journalist on the war going on between
the contas and the sandinistas and I was
more on the Sandinista side and they've
ended up as things have rolled out that
sandinistas are truly evil I mean Ortega
and what he's done to nicaragu is truly
evil but at the time
I thought they were pretty
great and I remember one day there was
this immense Plaza that they had and I
was in managa and magaga had just
suffered this incredible earthquake half
the city was in rubble still but there
was this immense Plaza was filled with
everyone because the pope had come there
and you know and it was a big deal
because the sun Denis was like you know
anti-god or something which wasn't true
anyway I was there with hundreds of
thousands of
people and um the feeling of being in
the group where everybody was on the
same side was so
intoxicating I felt so a ripple through
me that I've never had in my life again
of just being connected to all of these
people it was so joyous and exciting but
then it's also very dangerous as well so
you know I like having that experience
but as I got older I go I don't want to
feel like that again because I think it
can turn very ugly and dangerous as it
ended up turning that way in in
Nicaragua you know it's like a Hitler
crowd kind of thing I'm always
fascinated weirdly enough as a Jew by
Hitler documentaries I can watch every
single Hitler documentary it's just
riveting to watch like these nurburg
rallies my God it's like it's like a
drug it's insane all the people with
their torches all marching in the same
way with these insignias everything you
could understand how people will get
caught up in that kind of mania right
but it's very dangerous and even that
moment in managa later when I think back
on it hm maybe I I should have had a
little more self-distance from that do
you think we're in a similar time now
where we're getting caught up in
Mania yes we're getting caught up in in
easy solutions and and things that um
aren't really thought out I mean what is
human
stupidity question that that has um f
obsessed me for a long time and in fact
the third book in my series was
originally supposed to be the history of
human stupidity but my Publishers
thought it was too negative a subject
and it would have also been too long of
a book um but
stupidity is the inability to think the
consequences of your actions to think
that you are certain that you know the
answers to take action based on this
certainty but to not think of steps
three four and five that are going to
happen as a result and man I'm seeing
that all over the place on our political
map where people take action it's like
our ID is is running the world like
adolescence like you know I'll do this
man this will be cool this will be
interesting you don't realize that
you're going to get in a car wreck
because you took this drug and you're
driving your car we're getting a lot of
that kind of adolescent mentality I'm
going to take this action because it's
Fierce it's angry it's going to solve
things but the consequences down the
road 5 years from now are going to be
horrific that is human
stupidity you said that Trump is
deploying The Laws of
Power what Laws of Power has Trump
successfully deployed Court attention at
all cost he's the master of it he's I
remember remember uh I was in uh on a
book
tour I can't remember where it was some
corner of the world maybe it was
Australia maybe it was Singapore and
everybody was talking about Donald Trump
it was like the whole world is obsessed
with
him I don't think there's ever been a
moment in history where anybody has had
that kind of power Court attention at
all cost he's the absolute master of it
he's law number 27 play on people's need
to belief to create a cult like
following he has a cult-like
following right people nothing he does
can be wrong he was actually God is on
his side God is protecting him that's a
cult I'm sorry but that's a cult this is
politics it's not religion you know
interaction with boldness he knows how
to interaction with boldness law 28 I
believe or 29 so there's several laws he
he creates compelling spectacles but
there are a lot of laws that he violates
as well
at my company flight Studio which is
part of my bigger company flight group
we're constantly looking for ways to
build deeper connections with our
audiences whether that's a new show a
product or a project it's why I launched
the conversation cards I've relied on
Shopify before who's a sponsor of
today's podcast and I'll be using them
again for the next big launch which
we'll hear about soon and I use them
because of how easy it is to set up an
online store that reaches all of you no
matter where you are in the world with
Shopify the usual pain points of
launching products online Disappear
Completely completely no matter the size
of your business Shopify has everything
you need to make your business go to the
next level and better connect with your
customers all over the world to say
thank you to all of you for listening to
my show we're giving you a trial which
is just $1 a month you can sign up by
going to shopify.com
Bartlet that's shopify.com Bartlet or
find the link in the description
below one one of the things I I was
thinking about over the Christmas period
was um I identity and the pitfalls of
having an identity yeah in life and it
reminds me of law 48 in the 48 Laws of
Power which is to assume formlessness
yeah what do you think of the the
subject of identity because it's useful
to some degree but it can also be a
downfall as you alluded to at the start
of this conversation when you say that
you know someone gets to 30 40 years old
and they've almost have like a midlife
crisis because they've now they're now
like successful I don't know accountant
yeah and that that's their identity
that's their Friendship Circle I'm
wondering what your perspective on
identity is it's good not to think in in
such concrete terms of this is who I am
to place labels on it like I'm a lawyer
like I'm a right-wing Trump follower
like I'm an
entrepreneur you're much more than that
right there's something else about who
you are right you have a soul I know
that's an oldfashioned concept but I
believe people have a soul and it can be
their character their traits that they
have that almost have they have when
they're when they were born it's what
makes them who they are it's their sense
of dignity that they return to that self
but I can't put a label on it I can't
put a word on it I can't say it's being
a lawyer being white black left right or
whatever
right I like to think and this will
sound like I'm John Lenin in Imagine or
some sentimental thing like that but I
like to think of
myself as a citizen of the world as a
citizen of of the
Universe um
so personally maybe it's just me I'm
interested in every single culture in
every single religion you know I am just
as much fascinated by the Yuba religion
in West Africa as I am by Buddhism Islam
Etc they all fascinate me every country
every culture has something incredibly
interesting about it I've been studying
things like the Aztec culture I wrote
about extensively in my new book just an
amazing story amazing history it's not
me I I'm not ethnically uh
Mexican I'm not related to it through
time or anything but I'm related to it
as a human being and I identify with it
on a very deep level which po the sense
of Magic the sense of awe in in the face
of of this universe the incredible sense
of spectacle that they created
this and I describe it in my new book
the city that they C created tan KN
titlan is one of the greatest most
beautiful cities that ever existed that
mankind has ever created On a par with
Venice Italy completely destroyed by The
Conquistadors nothing of it remains if
you go to Mexico City you'll see nothing
they dest destroyed everything but the
picture presented by the first conis
stor that arrived there my God this is
like a fairy tale it is so beautiful
their artwork their culture their music
just blows me away when I read about
their
philosophy I identify with that if we
only had some distance we only
realized that we all come from the same
roots that there really is not such a
thing as an ethnicity that we all come
from the same human beings that it's all
relative that all the cultures are
related that all human beings are
interrelated it's such a simplistic
notion but it kind of destroys all of
our separations all our partisanship all
of our niggly little sense of identity I
don't get my identity from being from
California or Los Angeles or being
Jewish or being American I get it from
being a human being with this incredible
vast history no nobody else is going to
follow me in this I know it's just me
it's my wish and if human beings in a
100 years could believe that it would be
so beneficial for us in some way it
would mean we all have to protect this
planet so that we can give it to our
children that you know climate change
affects all of us that we're all in this
together I know I'm sounding not like
the guy who wrote the 48 Laws of Power
so excuse me for that the book you're
referring to that you're currently
writing and you're
getting to the end of thankfully um is
it called the law of sublime law the
sublime
yeah you've progressed with that book
since we last spoke so I'm just
wondering if I ask you the question now
what that book is about and why you're
writing it you know you you talked
earlier on in this conversation about
being really clear on why you're doing
something why are you writing that
book well I write my books always with a
sense of urgency like it's going to help
people cuz we're facing a problem I felt
the 48 Laws of Power was at a moment
where people were too naive I felt The
Art of Seduction where people didn't
understand about the psychology of
dealing with um this the Sexes Etc I
wrote the war book because I felt people
were terrible at strategy the 50 Cent
book is different but Mastery because
people had lost a sense of how to master
profession human nature because people
were really bad at dealing with people
now the problem I think is our minds are
getting smaller smaller and smaller and
smaller and smaller we're so absorbed in
things that are so unimportant so banal
so trivial so stupid at the same time
science is showing us the most marvelous
things you could possibly imagine you
know about the Big Bang Theory we're
being able to understand what the first
minutes of our universe were like we're
able to take a picture inside of a black
hole and understand what what's going on
in the black hole we're able to
understand the history of Earth someday
we going to know how life
began it's insane what science is
showing us about this world about the
world that we were living in about this
world that we were born into and I want
to open your eyes and expand your
Consciousness instead of shrink it to
the dimensions of what we're actually
facing in this world what how insane it
is to be sharing the planet with animals
and their strange Consciousness how they
think differently but how we can connect
to them we're the only animal that's
conscious that we know of but we can
connect to animals on a way that is just
insane I call it the interspecies
Sublime right I'm talking about how our
childhood was a moment of incredible
Sublimity how we were so open some
people had a very painful child I don't
know but we were very open to the world
and very imaginative about how strange
it is to be
alive that very easily dinosaurs could
be roaming this planet right now if a
meteor hadn't knocked out the dinosaurs
60 some million years ago okay on and on
and on I talked about love you know um
I'm writing now about artworks and
Aesthetics and things that that trigger
the sublime in US nature death which
will be the obviously the last chapter
but I just want you to sense that there
is something very strange about being
alive in the 21st centur
and not take it for granted and not just
be caught up in everything that's so
familiar and conventional and Bal and
open your eyes because as you do
this your emotions open up you're able
to feel different things your thoughts
open up you're able to have different
ideas you become more creative your your
Consciousness
expands anyway I could go on forever
because I've been writing the book
forever but that's sort of what it's
about and you think it'll be ready by
if it isn't I don't know if I'll still
be here because I it's literally it's
hard to explain Stephen but I can't type
and I can't take a walk and I can't do
the things that I used to do to kind of
decompress so I have to D I have to
handw write everything in two notebooks
with sticky pads here and there it's
like it's like a rats Maze and then I
dictated it on the computer it's taken
me this will be like ends up be like six
years of
work because the process has been so
difficult for me so my publisher I've
written I'm going to finish in a few
weeks the 10th chapter I have two left
I'm projecting to finish that by the end
of the year which would give me enough
time to have it published in
2026 I hope I pray because if not I
don't know if my body can take it
anymore do you mean that when you say
that you're not sure if your body can
take it anymore yeah I can't man I can't
take the focus it's like for 3 weeks now
I've been going this isn't working this
isn't working this isn't working I'm not
sleeping my my stomach is all churning
okay I'm getting too old for this then
suddenly I break through and and then it
comes back and then it happens again and
again when I start a chapter the first
couple months I'm relaxed I'm breathing
I'm fine then when I near the end of the
chapter I turn into the tightest person
you can imagine and I'm so tight and
then I finish it
and so I can't take much more of this to
be honest with you because I had a
stroke I'm not a young man anymore so I
you know I'm not gonna I'm not going to
be overly dramatic here I don't want to
be a drama queen I'm gonna I'll live
I'll be fine but seriously I I I can't I
couldn't take another like two years and
this would wouldn't I couldn't make that
two years of this book yeah no more
you're going to write another book
though aren't you oh yeah yeah yeah I'm
gonna write a book about kittens or
about you know or about the Lakers or
something easy I don't know something
nice and simple yeah one of the um the
clips that I saw the other day that's
your one of the most viewed clips from
you was about the primary law of human
psychology is that people judge based on
appearances this isn't a nice thing to
confront although everybody knows it's
true what does that mean well um I made
I mean it was a talk that I gave
recently in Atlanta and I was trying to
show the game of power as it's played
the rules of the game and um and the one
thing that I was trying to emphasize is
that power is a game of pure
psychology and what I mean by that
is um when you have a sports you have
game like baseball it's all statistics
and data mostly right so and there's a
winner and there was a loser they won
the game five to nothing Etc okay so
they're parameters
there's very little psychology involved
although in sports and so football and
there's some psychology but a lot of
it's just playing and winning but Power
isn't like that so when we elect a
leader like Donald Trump over kamla
Harris you might say oh he got more
votes but what is your judgment your
decision on voting for Donald Trump over
kamla Harris was it you spent four hours
with a spreadsheet going over all of
their economic policies deciding this
this is what's going to happen this is
how it's going to benefit me no it was
based on appearances on
psychology he seemed like a leader he
seemed like he had more Authority I kind
of like his ideas but you're not going
very deeply into it right it's his
appearance that mattered CEOs are often
hired because of their Optics because
it's not based completely on the amount
of money they've made and I believe me I
saw this first time when I was on the
board of directors people were hired not
on their Superior track record but on
their political
skills often yeah political skills is in
their ability to do sort of office
politics and stuff like that yeah I mean
there there was some uh you know metrics
involved but a lot of it was Optics okay
so the idea is Success the power game
the rule Laws of Power are in
understanding human psychology never
outshine the master you're creating the
appearance that you respect the master
that they are better than you that you
are going to obey them you're going to
follow them you're playing that game
always say less than necessary you're
wearing the mask of somebody powerful
who learns to control their tongue and
control their behavior Court attention
at all cost you know the behavior that
will get people to look at you and
attend to you do not build fortresses
you understand that appearing isolated
at somebody is very dangerous you know
how to play the perfect courtier you
create the appearance of power and that
is the power game is creating the
appearance of it it becomes a
self-fulfilling prophecy now of course
results do matter they do figure into
the picture I won't deny that but the
main part of the game the main part of
the laws are understanding the role of
appearances being a good actor and
knowing how to manage that properly in a
group situation so two people walked in
here and one of them had the appearance
of power and one of them didn't what
would the person who had the appearance
of power be doing how would they be
carrying themselves how would they be
speaking well a lot of of our idea of a
leader and power is non-verbal stuff
because as I said we're an animal we're
a social animal we don't like to believe
understand that but it's true and so a
lot of it's the body language so a
powerful person in a meeting is kind
of relaxed they're kind of like this
they could be they could put their
bodies anywhere
right with a other person is like all
tight and nervous and aware a powerful
person has a directed focus a weak
person is always was looking around
touching their hair touching their
face it's there's a word for I forget
what is in non-verbal communication but
it's a sign of
insecurity right a powerful person is
able to look at everybody in the room
directly whereas somebody who's weak is
always kind of averting their gaze there
are these these signs of kind of
confidence and
Carisma where you feel you are powerful
and it emanates outward your eyes have
that certain gaze it's unfortunate
because for women it's a little bit
harder to play that game because some of
the things that read as powerful for men
for women should read as powerful but
often read as she's mean she's a [__]
right so women have a harder time in
playing this game of appearances because
they're judged so much on their looks
and not about these other things so um
it's complicated but there're these kind
of cues that people give off that show
that they inwardly feel secure and
powerful and it kind of emanates outward
it's there's a law in there act like a
king to be treated like one if you feel
like you're a king or a
queen people will believe that you are
right it becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy and I have the story in there
of Christopher Columbus who was like the
son of of like a a grosser somewhere in
like Portugal or whatever but he
convinced all of the kings of Spain that
he came from
nobility and they it was a total con
game and they believed to be but he
carried himself like that he believed it
and they gave him all this money to go
and explore America that's sort of the
iconic story that I use for that
so you can fake it till you make it you
can to a degree but at some point it'll
catch up to you if you can't deliver
results so if it's all just make believe
if it's all just hype if it's all just
appearance and Optics you won't get very
far because you have to end up producing
and some of the laws are about that it's
not all about that so plan all the way
to the end is about like getting the
results that you want by planning all
the way to the end you know so it's not
just just Faking It that'll get you
somewhere but at some point you have to
produce real confidence the real
confidence to to be relaxed in your
chair to hold eye contact with somebody
where does that come from when we think
about confidence and power well it can
come from one of two things it can kind
of come from almost a form of insanity
where you believe since you were a child
that you were DED for something great
I'm so amazing I'm so wonderful and you
feel it and it's not completely made up
you actually do get things done but you
have that natural air that like a a
prince would have right what if you
don't have any confidence can can you
cultivate it yes you can you can the
thing is um the best way to to to
cultivate it is to actually have results
that that show to actually have a record
to go upon so you can kind of fake it
like Columbus did but Columbus already
had achieved some things when he did
that he'd already had some Naval skills
I believe don't quote me on that but
it's good to have some things to hang
your hat on that will help give you that
confidence so it's not completely faked
but William James the Great American
psychologist talked about as if
strategies and it's a very important
Concept in Psychology from the early 20s
Century if you believe as if you were
confident as if you are powerful it will
tend to be read that way right and so
like he had the analogy if you
smile even though you don't feel like
smiling you'll end up kind of maybe
feeling kind of happy so the physical
action will create the psychological
action was his belief because he was
very much believer in the body things
starting from the body so if you believe
physically and bodily embodied that you
are great that you deserve this it will
kind of become part of your psychology
and it will radiate outward but for
those that don't they just don't have
that belief can you lie to yourself can
you tell yourself I am strong and I am
powerful well everybody has some good
qualities right everybody I think almost
everybody has something that they can
can go back to in the past and go I was
actually very good at that that was
actually a good moment I actually was
was you know scored in that particular
moment and you can think about that I
mean actors do that all the time in
movies when they want to express an
emotion they go back into their past
like they have to express sadness they
go back and they think about their
father or mother who died and they call
that emotion up you can call that
emotion up of when you did something
actually really great you might have
only been in high school when you were
on the sports team and you you threw the
touchdown or something okay think about
that and it'll come back to you
everybody has something that they can be
confident about I
hope if there was one law that the
powerless amongst us who who feel
powerless or lost in the current world
one law or or
one fact of human nature that people who
are feeling lost and purposeless in a
drift right now should be thinking the
most
about which one Springs to
mind
well there's there's no one sharp answer
to this kind of thing but one law that I
would
highlight is interaction with
boldness and what I mean by that is
you if you're feeling timid if you're
feeling that you're not confident in
something you will start a project and
it will fail because you feel that way
because you don't enter into it with the
right
energy so if you feel if you take
something and you do something boldly
everybody loves the Bold everybody
admires it even if it's stupid even if
it fails it will gain you that kind of
attention and so let's say you're
thinking about starting a business well
just go ahead and do it and be bold
about it and start it and be as dramatic
as you can and be as confident as you
can and it creates a self-fulfilling
Dynamic people admire it they don't
admire the timid and the insecure and
the guy who spends two years talking
about that podcast he's going to start
they admired that bloke who just decided
all right I'm going to start it I don't
care if nobody likes it fine you know uh
I remember this guy interviewed me once
he had a magazine called bad ideas and
it was a really successful magazine in
like the early 2000s and I said where
did you get that idea and he said my
mother told me that to start that
magazine was a really bad idea right so
I thought I'd put the title there you
know and that would be the title of it
and I just went ahead and started it and
it was very successful because it was a
great like marketing gimmick and it also
worked and it was actually full of bad
ideas of the book thing but very in a
very interesting way um
so being bold being different everybody
nowadays I'm getting on my goddamn Soap
Box again and I'm so I apologize to
everyone about this but everyone is so
similar everybody is so afraid
everyone's trying to be like everybody
else you go out there and you start
something that's different that's you
that's unique that's loud that proclaims
I'm a different voice on it you're going
to get attention so I want more bold
people in this world we've got too much
fear you you know that's I'm not maybe a
big admirer of in some ways of Elon Musk
but damn it he's always bold and it
always works for him he doesn't start
just a a minimal business about maybe
sending Rockets out there he starts
think it's going to take you to the Mars
he's bold and people love it the world
moves out the way of boldness I was
thinking as you speaking about a memory
of mine of being at a festival in New
York City called Global citizen I was
like Beyonce was performing and stuff
all the biggest names in the world and
my friend was drunk
and we were in the like VIP section
behind the stage but we could see that
there was this access all areas artist
section and because my friend was drunk
I've never witnessed anything like it
this guy gets me takes my hand goes come
with me he walks directly at the two
massive security guards with this
boldness this conviction they just move
out of the way I thought you going to
say they punched him no they just moved
out of the way because of the way he was
walking they just thought well he must
he must be in here and they moved out of
the way they didn't check past they just
moved out of the way and he continued to
do that all day and it was because he
was drunk he he's done a documentary
about this he used to be an alcoholic so
he had this confidence when he was drunk
where the world would just like move out
of his way and he ended up going in what
I believe to be the president of some
Asian country's dressing room again
because he was just walking at things
right and the way he he was walking it
just moved out of his way right but I've
never forgotten that actually I deployed
it today when I went for a run um with
my girlfriend cuz I wanted to use a
bathroom in a restaurant and I figured
that if I just walk with a certain
conviction that the the staff will like
let me pass they'll assume maybe I'm sat
here and I ended up walking through a
conference uh where you have to like it
was like a conference Hall in this hotel
where they're checking people's badges
just cuz I was the way I was walking
nobody checked mine all right and
there's a metaphor here for life and you
kind of allude to it in your book about
like the Bolder you are the better um
some of these sub subheadings I find
really cool Lion Circle the hesitant
prey boldness strikes fear and fear
creates Authority going halfway with
half a heart digs the deeper grave
hesitation creates gaps boldness
obliterates them yeah and audacity
separates you from the her yeah yeah I
want if one thing if I have one Legacy
if I create more bold people in this
world I will be happy because we've got
too many timid hairs out there we need
more bold
Lions yeah something start your business
write that book do it just do it please
and then write me afterwards and either
blame me or thank me I wish I'd been
Bolder when I was um starting my
entrepreneurial career I wish someone
had said to me whatever your dream is
Steve when you describe it to people
times it by 10 whatever number you're
trying to raise as an
investment that's for sure in
negotiations you ask for 200,000 that's
what you get you ask for a million you
maybe get 500,000 but it's 300,000 more
than you would have gotten if You' been
timid always in negotiation ask the
higher price and mean it and say it with
conviction right and make sure you think
your price is high you'll get the higher
price it takes a certain confidence
though and that's really what's I think
at the heart of the problem maybe we
just all need to be a bit more drunk
that was a joke that's the lesson that's
law well we have a closing tradition on
this podcast okay where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're going to be leaving
it for the question that's left for you
oh sh
is close your
eyes and imagine yourself 10 years from
now where are you what are you doing and
who are you
with I'm hoping that I'm alive and
healthy and that my uh walking has
gotten better so that I can take a walk
and that I'm I'm with my wife and that
we're climbing a mountain which I
haven't been been able to do I loved
hiking and I'm able to do that I will be
crying in that moment because I am so
frustrated not being able to do what I
love the most and if that moment arrives
in 10 years God I I don't know how I
don't know I'll be so joyous you know to
be able to do something that I love so
much and has been taken away from me and
to have it back I'm not asking to be you
know an athlete or do what I could do
before if I could just take a simple
walk up a hill be so happy that's what
I'm
imagining it's a really important lesson
because we just take it all for granted
don't we please don't please don't and
other people I I read about who've had
experiences like this who were in an
accident at a young age it's worse
because I was already in my early
60s uh who've had this it's just like
how do you deal with it you know people
who were like athletic who were
energetic who were outdoors and then
it's all taken away it's a terrible
story but you learn life skills and you
learn how to deal with it and then I
still have my brain so I'm able to write
a book Thank God but I really really
want to be able to swim and Hike again
God I'd be so happy yes um puts
everything in perspective when you tell
me that you'd be in you'd be crying
tears of joy to walk up a hill I just to
walk up straight up the hill where I'm
the street I am I would be crying I
would my wife can can attest to that
because I'm so frustrated I'd be so
happy you know yeah what would you say
to someone like me who is quite clearly
because of the privilege that I have of
my Mobility going to be
taking taking it all for granted
and well you know I I walk people walk
by my window in my office I've told you
I think it was on my last conversation I
mentioned this so I don't want to keep
repeating myself but I see them walking
their dog or riding their bicycle or
jogging and a go they don't realize
how beautiful that looks to me they
don't appreciate it and because they
don't appreciate it it doesn't mean that
much to me them it means more to me than
it does to them they should be
appreciating it they should be thinking
I think of my neighbor he's just out in
his driveway fixing cars and he's
listening to his music he should be so
happy that he's got his body that he's
doing this that he's in the moment that
he's present but he's not I'm the one
that's feeling his Joy at being like
that but you should be feeling that in
your everyday activities that you're
alive that you're a human being that
walking you take for granted walking as
somebody who can't walk it I know like
you're always balancing on one leg you
don't realize that when you walk the
miracle of a human walk is at every
moment you're always on one leg that's a
balancing act and you're able to do that
you're able to run and do it don't don't
take that stuff for granted you know cuz
I can't every step I take I have to
think about balancing on that left leg
of mine you had a a a wasp or a beasting
that resulted in a stroke which is what
pretty much changed your
Mobility if you could go back and speak
to Robert before that 20-year-old Robert
and you could just whisper something to
him I would whisper to 20-year-old
Robert
um just don't think about it Robert
everything is going to come out okay you
you you know don't just be who you are
don't regret anything it's all working
out for the best and uh just I can't say
like I would say Enjoy the moment
because I was enjoying my 20s immensely
but maybe when I was 34 I would have
said you know don't give up it's going
to happen everything's going to fit into
place and you're going to have an
amazing
life you're going to be meeting Stevie
Wonder one of your Idols when you were a
kid Bob Dylan is going to be mentioning
you in a book and has read your book the
people that you loved when you were a
kid you're going to be meeting and
hanging out with 50 c you're going to be
meeting presidents you have no idea
what's ahead of you okay I would maybe
said something like that but then maybe
I would have gotten lazy and I wouldn't
have written it because I would have
thought oh just it's all going to happen
so so maybe the doubt and the worry and
the yeah yeah is useful and the neurotic
energy yeah Robert thank you so much
we're all very very excited for your
upcoming book oh yeah so am I so um you
talk about urgency we can't wait okay um
and we're very much looking forward to
it because I know how much you pour into
these books and you've expressed how
much you sort of agonize over it being
exactly what you wanted to say and not
all authors are like that um some are a
little bit more flippant um so I
appreciate that so much and I appreciate
the time that you've spent on my show
and the value that you've given my
audience they
I was looking at some of the comments
earlier and it's just incredible the
impact you've had on people by sharing
your own story talking about the stroke
and and the gratitude that that's given
you for for life and the Gratitude we
need to have so thank you so
unbelievably much very welcome thank you
for the opportunity for the honor of
being on this incredibly exciting
podcast of years and as I say every
morning this is my third time I've
always had like a I've always been in a
good mood the morning before I don't
know if it's a coincidence or if it's
something about being on your your
podcast so thank you the honor is all
mine thank you Robert you're welcome
this has always blown my mind a little
bit 53% of you that listen to the show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to the
show if you like the show and you like
what we do here and you want to support
us the free simple way that you can do
just that is by hitting the Subscribe
button and I commitment to you is if you
do that then I'll do everything in my
power me and my team to make sure that
this show is better for you every single
week we'll listen to your feedback we'll
find the guest that you want me to speak
to and we'll continue to do what we do
thank you so much
a
[Music]